 The War of the Worlds 
H. G. Wells 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This eBook was designed and published by Planet PDF. For more 
free eBooks visit our Web site at 
http://www.planetpdf.com/
. To hear 
about our latest releases subscribe to the 
Planet PDF Newsletter
.The War of the Worlds  
2 of 293 But who shall dwell in these worlds if they be 
inhabited? . . . Are we or th
ey Lords of the World? . . . 
And how are all things made for man? 

KEPLER (quoted in The Anatomy of Melancholy) 
The War of the Worlds  
3 of 293 BOOK ONE  THE COMING OF THE MARTIANS The War of the Worlds  
4 of 293 CHAPTER ONE 
 THE EVE OF THE WAR No one would have believed 
in the last years of the 
nineteenth century that this world was being watched 
keenly and closely by intelligences greater than mans and 

yet as mortal as his own; th
at as men busied themselves 
about their various concerns they were scrutinised and 

studied, perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a 

microscope might scrutinise the transient creatures that 

swarm and multiply in a drop of water. With infinite 

complacency men went to and fro over this globe about 

their little affairs, serene in 
their assurance of their empire 
over matter. It is possible that the infusoria under the 

microscope do the same. No one gave a thought to the 

older worlds of space as sources of human danger, or 

thought of them only to dismiss the idea of life upon them 

as impossible or improbable. It
 is curious to recall some 
of the mental habits of t
hose departed days. At most 
terrestrial men fancied there might be other men upon 

Mars, perhaps inferior to themselves and ready to 

welcome a missionary enterprise. Yet across the gulf of 

space, minds that are to our minds as ours are to those of 
The War of the Worlds  
5 of 293 the beasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and 
unsympathetic, regarded this 
earth with envious eyes, and 
slowly and surely drew thei
r plans against us. And early in the twentieth century came 
the great disillusionment. 
The planet Mars, I scarcely need remind the reader, 
revolves about the sun at 
a mean distance of 140,000,000 
miles, and the light and heat 
it receives from the sun is 
barely half of that received by this world. It must be, if the 

nebular hypothesis has any tr
uth, older than our world; 
and long before this earth 
ceased to be molten, life upon 
its surface must have begun its course. The fact that it is 

scarcely one seventh of the vol
ume of the earth must have 
accelerated its cooling to th
e temperature at which life 
could begin. It has air and wa
ter and all that is necessary 
for the support of animated existence. 
Yet so vain is man, and so blinded by his vanity, that 
no writer, up to the very end of the nineteenth century, ex- 

pressed any idea that intellig
ent life might have developed 
there far, or indeed at all, beyond its earthly level. Nor 

was it generally understood that since Mars is older than 

our earth, with scarcely a quart
er of the superficial area 
and remoter from the sun, it necessarily follows that it is 
not only more distant from tim
es beginning but nearer its 
end. The War of the Worlds  
6 of 293 The secular cooling that 
must someday overtake our 
planet has already gone far in
deed with our neighbour. Its 
physical condition is still la
rgely a mystery, but we know 
now that even in its equatorial region the midday 

temperature barely approaches that of our coldest winter. 

Its air is much more attenuate
d than ours, its oceans have 
shrunk until they cover but a thir
d of its surfac
e, and as its 
slow seasons change huge snowcaps gather and melt 

about either pole and periodi
cally inundate its temperate 
zones. That last stage of exhaustion, which to us is still 

incredibly remote, has become a present-day problem for 

the inhabitants of Mars. Th
e immediate pressure of 
necessity has brightened thei
r intellects, enlarged their 
powers, and hardened their hearts. And looking across 

space with instruments, and intelligences such as we have 

scarcely dreamed of, they see, at its nearest distance only 

35,000,000 of miles sunward of th
em, a morning star of 
hope, our own warmer planet, green with vegetation and 

grey with water, with a 
cloudy atmosphere eloquent of 
fertility, with glimpses thr
ough its drifting cloud wisps of 
broad stretches of populous
 country and narrow, navy-
crowded seas. And we men, the creatures w
ho inhabit this earth, must 
be to them at least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys 
The War of the Worlds  
7 of 293 and lemurs to us. The intelle
ctual side of man already 
admits that life is an incessant struggle for existence, and 

it would seem that this too is
 the belief of the minds upon 
Mars. Their world is far gone in its cooling and this world 

is still crowded with life, 
but crowded only with what 
they regard as inferior animals. To carry warfare sunward 

is, indeed, their only escape from the destruction that, 

generation after generation, creeps upon them. 
And before we judge of them too harshly we must 
remember what ruthless and utter destruction our own 

species has wrought, not only upon animals, such as the 

vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its inferior races. 

The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness, were 

entirely swept out of existence in a war of extermination 

waged by European immigrants
, in the space of fifty 
years. Are we such apostles of mercy as to complain if the 
Martians warred in the same spirit? 
The Martians seem to have calculated their descent 
with amazing subtletytheir 
mathematical learning is 
evidently far in excess of oursand to have carried out 

their preparations with a we
ll-nigh perfect unanimity. Had 
our instruments permitted it, we might have seen the 
gathering trouble far back in 
the nineteenth century. Men 
like Schiaparelli watched the red planetit is odd, by-
The War of the Worlds  
8 of 293 the-bye, that for count- less cen
turies Mars has been the 
star of warbut failed to
 interpret the fluctuating 
appearances of the markings they mapped so well. All 

that time the Martians must have been getting ready. 
During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen 
on the illuminated part of th
e disk, first at the Lick 
Observatory, then by Perrotin of Nice, and then by other 

observers. English readers heard of it first in the issue of 

NATURE dated August 2. I am incl
ined to thin
k that this 
blaze may have been the cas
ting of the huge gun, in the 
vast pit sunk into their planet, from wh
ich their shots were fired at us. Peculiar markings
, as yet unexplained, were 
seen near the site of that
 outbreak during the next two 
oppositions. 
The storm burst upon us six years ago now. As Mars 
approached opposition, Lavelle of Java set the wires of 

the astronomical exchange pa
lpitating with the amazing 
intelligence of a huge outbreak of incandescent gas upon 

the planet. It had occurred towards midnight of the 

twelfth; and the spectroscope
, to which he had at once 
resorted, indicated a mass 
of flaming gas, chiefly 
hydrogen, moving with an enorm
ous velocity towards this 
earth. This jet of fire had become invisible about a quarter 
past twelve. He compared it to a colossal puff of flame 
The War of the Worlds  
9 of 293 suddenly and violently squirted out of the planet, as 
flaming gases rushed out of a gun. 
A singularly appropriate phras
e it proved. Yet the next 
day there was nothing of this in
 the papers except a little 
note in the DAILY TELEGRAPH
, and the world went in 
ignorance of one of the gr
avest dangers that ever 
threatened the human race. I might not have heard of the 

eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy, the well-known 

astronomer, at Ottershaw. He
 was immensely excited at 
the news, and in the excess of his feelings invited me up 

to take a turn with him that night in a scrutiny of the red 

planet. In spite of all that has happe
ned since, I still remember 
that vigil very distinctly: the black and silent observatory, 

the shadowed lantern throwing a feeble glow upon the 

floor in the corner, the steady 
ticking of the clockwork of 
the telescope, the little slit in the roofan oblong 

profundity with the stardust 
streaked across it. Ogilvy 
moved about, invisible but 
audible. Looking through the 
telescope, one saw a circle of
 deep blue and the little 
round planet swimming in the fiel
d. It seemed such a little 
thing, so bright and small and 
still, faintly marked with 
transverse stripes, and sligh
tly flattened from the perfect 
round. But so little it was, so silvery warma pins-head 
The War of the Worlds  
10 of 293 of light! It was as if it quive
red, but really this was the 
telescope vibrating with the ac
tivity of the clockwork that 
kept the planet in view. As I watched, the planet seemed to grow larger and 
smaller and to advance and recede, but that was simply 

that my eye was tired. Forty millions of miles it was from 

usmore than forty millions 
of miles of void. Few people 
realise the immensity of vacancy in which the dust of the 

material universe swims. 
Near it in the field, I remember, were three faint points 
of light, three telescopic stars infinitely remote, and all 

around it was the unfathomable darkness of empty space. 

You know how that blackness lo
oks on a frosty starlight 
night. In a telescope it seems far profounder. And 

invisible to me because it was so remote and small, flying 

swiftly and steadily towards me across that incredible 

distance, drawing nearer 
every minute by so many 
thousands of miles, came the Thing they were sending us, 

the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamity 

and death to the earth. I ne
ver dreamed of it then as I 
watched; no one on earth 
dreamed of that unerring 
missile. 
That night, too, there was 
another jetting out of gas 
from the distant planet. I saw it. A reddish flash at the 
The War of the Worlds  
11 of 293 edge, the slightest projection of the outline just as the 
chronometer struck midnight; and at that I told Ogilvy 

and he took my place. The 
night was warm and I was 
thirsty, and I went stretching my
 legs clumsily and feeling 
my way in the darkness, to the little table where the 

siphon stood, while Ogilvy exclai
med at the streamer of 
gas that came out towards us. That night another invisibl
e missile started on its way 
to the earth from Mars, just a second or so under twenty-

four hours after the first one. I remember how I sat on the 

table there in the blackness, 
with patches of green and 
crimson swimming before my ey
es. I wished I had a light 
to smoke by, little suspecting the meaning of the minute 

gleam I had seen and all that it would presently bring me. 

Ogilvy watched till one, and th
en gave it up; and we lit 
the lantern and walked over to his house. Down below in 

the darkness were Ottershaw 
and Chertsey and all their 
hundreds of people, sleeping in peace. He was full of speculati
on that night about the 
condition of Mars, and scoffe
d at the vulgar idea of its 
having in- habitants who were 
signalling us. His idea was 
that meteorites might be falling in a heavy shower upon 
the planet, or that a huge
 volcanic explosion was in 
progress. He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that 
The War of the Worlds  
12 of 293 organic evolution had taken the same direction in the two 
adjacent planets. 
The chances against anything manlike on Mars are a 
million to one, he said. 
Hundreds of observers saw the flame that night and the 
night after about midnight, and 
again the night after; and 
so for ten nights, a flame each night. Why the shots 

ceased after the tenth no one on earth has attempted to 

explain. It may be the gases of the firing caused the 

Martians in- convenience. Dens
e clouds of smoke or dust, 
visible through a powerful te
lescope on earth as little 
grey, fluctuating patches, sp
read through the clearness of 
the planets atmosphere and obscured its more familiar 

features. Even the daily papers woke 
up to the disturbances at 
last, and popular notes appe
ared here, there, and 
everywhere concerning 
the volcanoes upon Mars. The seriocomic periodical P
UNCH, I remember, made a 
happy use of it in the po
litical cartoon. And, all 
unsuspected, those missiles the Martians had fired at us 

drew earthward, rushing now 
at a pace of many miles a 
second through the empty gulf of space, hour by hour and 
day by day, nearer and nearer. 
It seems to me now almost 
incredibly wonderful that, w
ith that swift fate hanging 
The War of the Worlds  
13 of 293 over us, men could go about thei
r petty concerns as they 
did. I remember how jubilant Markham was at securing a 

new photograph of the planet fo
r the illustrated paper he edited in those days. People in these latter times scarcely 

realise the abundance and enterprise of our nineteenth-
century papers. For my own part, I was much occupied in 

learning to ride the bicycle,
 and busy upon a series of 
papers discussing the probabl
e developments of moral 
ideas as civilisation progressed. One night (the first missile then could scarcely have 
been 10,000,000 miles away) I went for a walk with my 

wife. It was starlight and I explained the Signs of the 

Zodiac to her, and pointed out Mars, a bright dot of light 

creeping zenithward, towards 
which so many telescopes 
were pointed. It was a warm
 night. Coming home, a party 
of excursionists from Cherts
ey or Isleworth passed us 
singing and playing music. Th
ere were lights in the upper 
windows of the houses as the people went to bed. From 

the railway stati
on in the distance came the sound of 
shunting trains, ringing and rumbling, softened almost 

into melody by the distance. My wife pointed out to me 

the brightness of the red, gr
een, and yellow signal lights 
hanging in a framework against the sky. It seemed so safe 
and tranquil. The War of the Worlds  
14 of 293 CHAPTER TWO 
 THE FALLING STAR Then came the night of the first falling star. It was seen 
early in the morning, rushing 
over Winchester eastward, a 
line of flame high in the atmosphere. Hundreds must have 

seen it, and taken it for an ordinary falling star. Albin 

described it as leaving a greenish streak behind it that 

glowed for some seconds. De
nning, our greatest authority 
on meteor- ites, stated that the height of its first 

appearance was about ninety 
or one hundred miles. It 
seemed to him that it fell to
 earth about one hundred miles 
east of him. 
I was at home at that hour 
and writing in my study; and 
although my French windows face towards Ottershaw and 

the blind was up (for I loved in those days to look up at 

the night sky), I saw nothing of it. Yet this strangest of all 

things that ever came to earth from outer space must have 
fallen while I was sitting ther
e, visible to me had I only 
looked up as it passed. Some of those who saw its flight 

say it travelled with a hi
ssing sound. I myself heard 
nothing of that. Many people in Berkshire, Surrey, and 
The War of the Worlds  
15 of 293 Middlesex must have seen the fall of it, and, at most, have 
thought that another meteorite had descended. No one 

seems to have troubled to look for the fallen mass that 

night. But very early in the morning poor Ogilvy, who had 
seen the shooting star and 
who was persuaded that a 
meteorite lay somewhere on the common between 

Horsell, Ottershaw, and Woking, rose early with the idea 

of finding it. Find it he did, soon after dawn, and not far 

from the sand pits. An enormous hole had been made by 

the impact of the projectile
, and the sand and gravel had 
been flung violently in ever
y direction over the heath, forming heaps visible a mile and a half away. The heather 

was on fire eastward, and a th
in blue smoke rose against 
the dawn. The Thing itself lay almost
 entirely buried in sand, 
amidst the scattered splinters of a fir tree it had shivered 

to fragments in its descent.
 The uncovered part had the 
appearance of a huge cylinder,
 caked over and its outline 
softened by a thick scaly dun-co
loured incrustation. It had 
a diameter of about thirty yards. He approached the mass, 

surprised at the size and more 
so at the shape, since most 
meteorites are rounded more or less completely. It was, 
however, still so hot from its 
flight through the air as to 
The War of the Worlds  
16 of 293 forbid his near approach. A stirring noise within its 
cylinder he ascribed to the 
unequal cooling of its surface; 
for at that time it had not occurred to him that it might be 

hollow. He remained standing at the edge of the pit that the 
Thing had made for itself,
 staring at its strange 
appearance, astonished chie
fly at its unusual shape and 
colour, and dimly perceiving even then some evidence of 

design in its arrival. The ea
rly morning was wonderfully 
still, and the sun, just clea
ring the pine trees towards 
Weybridge, was already warm. He did not remember 
hearing any birds that morning, there was certainly no 

breeze stirring, and the only sounds were the faint 

movements from within the ci
ndery cylinder. He was all 
alone on the common. Then suddenly he noticed with
 a start that some of the 
grey clinker, the ashy incrustation that covered the 

meteorite, was falling off the circular edge of the end. It 

was dropping off in flakes and raining down upon the 

sand. A large piece suddenly came off and fell with a 

sharp noise that brought his heart into his mouth. 
For a minute he scarcely realised what this meant, and, 
although the heat was excessive, he clambered down into 
the pit close to the bulk to see the Thing more clearly. He 
The War of the Worlds  
17 of 293 fancied even then that the cooling of the body might 
account for this, but what dist
urbed that idea was the fact 
that the ash was falling only from the end of the cylinder. 
And then he perceived that, 
very slowly, the circular 
top of the cylinder was rotating on its body. It was such a 

gradual movement that he discovered it only through 

noticing that a black mark th
at had been near him five 
minutes ago was now at the other side of the 

circumference. Even then 
he scarcely understood what 
this indicated, until he heard a muffled grating sound and 

saw the black mark jerk forward an inch or so. Then the 

thing came upon him in a flash. The cylinder was 

artificialhollowwith an end that screwed out! 

Something within the cylinder was unscrewing the top! 
Good heavens! said Ogilvy. 
Theres a man in it
men in it! Half roasted to death! Trying to escape! 
At once, with a quick mental
 leap, he linked the Thing 
with the flash upon Mars. The thought of the confined creature was so dreadful to him that he forgot the heat and went forward to the 

cylinder to help turn. But luckily the dull radiation 

arrested him before he could burn his hands on the still-
glowing metal. At that he 
stood irresolute for a moment, 
then turned, scrambled out of the pit, and set off running 
The War of the Worlds  
18 of 293 wildly into Woking. The tim
e then must have been 
somewhere about six ocl
ock. He met a waggoner and 
tried to make him understand, but the tale he told and his 

appearance were so wildhis hat had fallen off in the 

pitthat the man simply 
drove on. He was equally 
unsuccessful with the potman who was just unlocking the 

doors of the public-house by Horsell Bridge. The fellow 

thought he was a lunatic 
at large and made an 
unsuccessful attempt to shut 
him into the taproom. That 
sobered him a little; and when he saw Henderson, the 

London journalist, in his garden, he called over the 

palings and made himself understood. 
Henderson, he called, you saw that shooting star last 
night? Well? said Henderson. 

Its out on Horsell Common now. 
Good Lord! said Henderson. Fallen meteorite! 
Thats good. But its something more than a meteorite. Its a 
cylinder an artificial cy
linder, man! And theres 
something inside. 
Henderson stood up with his spade in his hand. Whats that? he said. He was deaf in one ear. 
The War of the Worlds  
19 of 293 Ogilvy told him all that he had seen. Henderson was a 
minute or so taking it in. Th
en he dropped his spade, 
snatched up his jacket, and came out into the road. The 

two men hurried back at on
ce to the common, and found 
the cylinder still lying in the same position. But now the 

sounds inside had ceased, and a thin circle of bright metal 

showed between the top and th
e body of the cylinder. Air 
was either entering or escapi
ng at the rim with a thin, 
sizzling sound. They listened, rapped on the 
scaly burnt metal with a 
stick, and, meeting with no response, they both concluded 

the man or men inside must be insensible or dead. 
Of course the two were qui
te unable to do anything. 
They shouted consolation a
nd promises, and went off 
back to the town again to ge
t help. One can imagine them, 
covered with sand, excited and disordered, running up the 

little street in the bright s
unlight just as the shop folks 
were taking down their shutte
rs and people were opening 
their bedroom windows. Henders
on went into the railway 
station at once, in order to 
telegraph the news to London. 
The newspaper articles had pr
epared mens minds for the 
reception of the idea. 
By eight oclock a number of boys and unemployed 
men had already started for the common to see the dead 
The War of the Worlds  
20 of 293 men from Mars. That was the form the story took. I 
heard of it first from my ne
wspaper boy about a quarter to 
nine when I went out to get my DAILY CHRONICLE. I 

was naturally startled, and lost no time in going out and 

across the Ottershaw bridge to the sand pits. The War of the Worlds  
21 of 293 CHAPTER THREE 
 ON HORSELL COMMON I found a little crowd of perhaps twenty people 
surrounding the huge hole in which the cylinder lay. I 

have already described the appearance of that colossal 

bulk, embedded in the ground. The turf and gravel about 

it seemed charred as if by 
a sudden explosion. No doubt 
its impact had caused a flas
h of fire. Henderson and 
Ogilvy were not there. I thi
nk they perceived that nothing 
was to be done for the pres
ent, and had gone away to 
breakfast at Hendersons house. There were four or five boys sitting on the edge of the 
Pit, with their feet dangling, and amusing themselves

until I stopped themby throwing stones at the giant 

mass. After I had spoken to 
them about it, they began 
playing at touch in and out of the group of bystanders. Among these were a couple of cyclists, a jobbing 
gardener I employed sometime
s, a girl carrying a baby, 
Gregg the butcher and his little boy, and two or three 

loafers and golf caddies who were accustomed to hang 

about the railway station. Th
ere was very little talking. 
The War of the Worlds  
22 of 293 Few of the common people in England had anything but 
the vaguest astronomical ideas in those days. Most of 

them were staring quietly at 
the big tablelike end of the 
cylinder, which was still as
 Ogilvy and Henderson had 
left it. I fancy the popular expectation of a h
eap of charred 
corpses was disappointed at 
this inanimate bulk. Some 
went away while I was there, and other people came. I 

clambered into the pit and fancied I heard a faint 

movement under my feet. The top had certainly ceased to 

rotate. 
It was only when I got t
hus close to it that the 
strangeness of this object was at all evident to me. At the 

first glance it was really no more exciting than an 

overturned carriage or a tree
 blown across the road. Not 
so much so, indeed. It looke
d like a rusty gas float. It 
required a certain amount of 
scientific education to 
perceive that the grey scale of the Thing was no common 

oxide, that the yellowish-white metal that gleamed in the 

crack between the lid and the cylinder had an unfamiliar 

hue. Extra-terrestrial had no meaning for most of the 
onlookers. At that time it was quite clear in my own mind that the 
Thing had come from the pl
anet Mars, but I judged it 
improbable that it contained 
any living creature. I thought The War of the Worlds  
23 of 293 the unscrewing might be automatic. In spite of Ogilvy, I 
still believed that there were men in Mars. My mind ran 

fancifully on the possibilities of its containing manuscript, 

on the difficulties in translation that might arise, whether 

we should find coins and models 
in it, and so forth. Yet it 
was a little too large for assurance on this idea. I felt an 

impatience to see it opened. About eleven, as nothing 

seemed happening, I walked back, full of such thought, to 

my home in Maybury. But I f
ound it difficult to get to 
work upon my abstract investigations. In the afternoon the appear
ance of the common had 
altered very much. The early
 editions of the evening 
papers had startled London with enormous headlines: A MESSAGE RECEIVED FROM MARS. 
REMARKABLE STORY FROM WOKING, 

and so forth. In addition, Ogilvys wire to the 
Astronomical Exchange had r
oused every obs
ervatory in 
the three kingdoms. 
There were half a dozen flie
s or more from the Woking 
station standing in the road
 by the sand pits, a basket- 
chaise from Chobham, and a rather lordly carriage. 

Besides that, there was quite a heap of bicycles. In 
addition, a large number of pe
ople must have walked, in 
spite of the heat of the da
y, from Woking and Chertsey, 
The War of the Worlds  
24 of 293 so that there was altogether
 quite a consid
erable crowd
one or two gaily dressed ladi
es among the others. It was 
glaringly hot, not a cloud in 
the sky nor a breath of wind, 
and the only shadow was that of the few scattered pine 

trees. The burning heather had 
been extinguished, but the 
level ground towards Ottersha
w was blackened as far as 
one could see, and still givi
ng off vertical streamers of 
smoke. An enterprising sweet-stuff dealer in the Chobham 

Road had sent up his son with a barrow-load of green 

apples and ginger beer. Going to the edge of the p
it, I found it occupied by a 
group of about half a dozen menHenderson, Ogilvy, 

and a tall, fair-haired man th
at I afterwards learned was 
Stent, the Astronomer Roya
l, with several workmen 
wielding spades and pickaxes. 
Stent was giving directions in a clear, high- pitched 
voice. He was standing on the 
cylinder, which was now eviden
tly much cooler; his face 
was crimson and streaming 
with perspiration, and 
something seemed to have irritated him. 
A large portion of the cy
linder had been uncovered, 
though its lower end was still embedded. As soon as 
Ogilvy saw me among the star
ing crowd on the edge of 
the pit he called to me to come down, and asked me if I 
The War of the Worlds  
25 of 293 would mind going over to see Lord Hilton, the lord of the 
manor. 
The growing crowd, he said
, was becoming a serious 
impediment to their excavations, especially the boys. 

They wanted a light railing pu
t up, and help to keep the 
people back. He told me 
that a faint stirring was 
occasionally still audible within the case, but that the 

workmen had failed to unscrew the top, as it afforded no 

grip to them. The case appeared to be enormously thick, 

and it was possible that th
e faint sounds we heard 
represented a noisy tumult in the interior. 
I was very glad to do as he asked, and so become one 
of the privileged spectators within the contemplated 

enclosure. I failed to find Lo
rd Hilton at his house, but I 
was told he was expected fr
om London by the six oclock 
train from Waterloo; and as it was then about a quarter 

past five, I went 
home, had some tea, and walked up to 
the station to waylay him. The War of the Worlds  
26 of 293 CHAPTER FOUR 
 THE CYLINDER OPENS 
When I returned to the common the sun was setting. 
Scattered groups were hurrying from the direction of 

Woking, and one or two persons were returning. The 

crowd about the pit had incr
eased, and stood out black 
against the lemon yellow of the skya couple of hundred 

people, perhaps. There were 
raised voices, and some sort 
of struggle appeared to be goi
ng on about the pit. Strange 
imaginings passed through my mind. As I drew nearer I 

heard Stents voice: 
Keep back! Keep back! 
A boy came running towards me. 

Its a-movin, he said to 
me as he passed; a-screwin 
and a-screwin out. I dont li
ke it. Im a-goin ome, I 
am. 
I went on to the crowd. There were really, I should 
think, two or three hundred people elbowing and jostling 
one an- other, the one or tw
o ladies there being by no 
means the least active. 
Hes fallen in the pit! cried some one. 
The War of the Worlds  
27 of 293 Keep back! said several. The crowd swayed a little, and I elbowed my way 
through. Every one seemed greatly excited. I heard a 

peculiar humming sound from the pit. 
I say! said Ogilvy; help k
eep these idiots back. We 
dont know whats in the confounded thing, you know! I saw a young man, a shop assistant in Woking I 
believe he was, standing on 
the cylinder and trying to 
scramble out of the hole ag
ain. The crowd had pushed 
him in. 
The end of the cylinder was being screwed out from 
within. Nearly two feet of
 shining screw projected. 
Somebody blundered against me, and I narrowly missed 

being pitched onto the top of the screw. I turned, and as I 
did so the screw must have 
come out, for the lid of the 
cylinder fell upon the gravel 
with a ringing concussion. I 
stuck my elbow into the person behind me, and turned my 

head towards the Thing again. For a moment that circular 

cavity seemed perfectly black. I had the sunset in my 

eyes. I think everyone expected to see a man emerge
possibly something a little unlik
e us terrestrial men, but in 
all essentials a man. I know I did. But, looking, I 
presently saw some- thing stirring within the shadow: 
The War of the Worlds  
28 of 293 greyish billowy movements, one
 above another, and then 
two luminous diskslike eyes. Then something 

resembling a little grey snake, about the thickness of a 

walking stick, coiled up out 
of the writhing middle, and 
wriggled in the air towa
rds meand then another. 
A sudden chill came over me. There was a loud shriek 
from a woman behind. I half
 turned, keeping my eyes 
fixed upon the cylinder still, 
from which other tentacles 
were now projecting, and began pushing my way back 

from the edge of the pit. I saw astonishment giving place 

to horror on the faces of the people about me. I heard 

inarticulate exclamations on a
ll sides. There was a general 
movement backwards. I saw 
the shopman struggling still 
on the edge of the pit. I f
ound myself alone, and saw the 
people on the other side of the pit running off, Stent 

among them. I looked again at the cylinder, and 

ungovernable terror gripped me. I stood petrified and 

staring. A big greyish rounded bulk, the size, perhaps, of a 
bear, was rising slowly and pa
infully out of the cylinder. 
As it bulged up and caught the light, it glistened like wet 

leather. 
Two large dark-coloured eyes were regarding me 
steadfastly. The mass that fram
ed them, the head of the 
The War of the Worlds  
29 of 293 thing, was rounded, and had, one might say, a face. There 
was a mouth under the eyes, the lipless brim of which 

quivered and panted, and dropped saliva. The whole 

creature heaved and pul
sated convulsively. A lank tentacular appendage gripped the edge of the cylinder, 

another swayed in the air. Those who have never seen a living Martian can 
scarcely imagine the strange horror of its appearance. The 

peculiar V-shaped mouth with
 its pointed upper lip, the 
absence of brow ridges, the ab
sence of a chin beneath the 
wedgelike lower lip, the incessant quivering of this 
mouth, the Gorgon groups of 
tentacles, the tumultuous 
breathing of the lungs in a strange atmosphere, the evident 
heaviness and painfulness of 
movement due to the greater 
gravitational energy of the earthabove all, the 

extraordinary intensity of the immense eyeswere at 

once vital, intense, inhuman, crippled and monstrous. 

There was something fungoid in the oily brown skin, 

something in the clumsy deliberation of the tedious 

movements unspeakably nasty. Even at this first en- 

counter, this first glimpse, 
I was overcome with disgust 
and dread. Suddenly the monster vanished. It had toppled over the 
brim of the cylinder and fallen into the pit, with a thud 
The War of the Worlds  
30 of 293 like the fall of a great mass of
 leather. I heard it give a 
peculiar thick cry, and fo
rthwith another of these 
creatures appeared darkly in
 the deep shadow of the 
aperture. 
I turned and, running madly, made for the first group 
of trees, perhaps a hundred yards away; but I ran 

slantingly and stumbling, for I could not avert my face 

from these things. 
There, among some young pine trees and furze bushes, 
I stopped, panting, and waited 
further developments. The common round the sand pits was dotted with people, 

standing like myself in a half-f
ascinated terror, staring at these creatures, or rather at the heaped gravel at the edge 

of the pit in which they lay. And then, with a renewed 

horror, I saw a round, black 
object bobbing up and down 
on the edge of the pit. It was the head of the shopman who 

had fallen in, but showing as 
a little black object against 
the hot western sun. Now he got his shoulder and knee up, 
and again he seemed to slip back until only his head was 

visible. Suddenly he vanishe
d, and I could have fancied a 
faint shriek had reached me. I had a momentary impulse 

to go back and help him that my fears overruled. 
Everything was then quite 
invisible, hidden by the 
deep pit and the heap of sand that the fall of the cylinder 
The War of the Worlds  
31 of 293 had made. Anyone coming along the road from Chobham 
or Woking would have b
een amazed at the sighta 
dwindling multitude of perhaps a hundred people or more 

standing in a great irregular circle, in ditches, behind 

bushes, behind gates and he
dges, saying little to one 
another and that in short, 
excited shouts, and staring, 
staring hard at a few heaps of sand. The barrow of ginger 

beer stood, a queer derelict, bl
ack against the burning sky, and in the sand pits was a row 
of deserted vehicles with 
their horses feeding out of nosebags or pawing the 

ground. The War of the Worlds  
32 of 293 CHAPTER FIVE 
 THE HEAT-RAY After the glimpse I had had 
of the Martians emerging 
from the cylinder in which they had come to the earth 

from their planet, a kind of fascination paralysed my 

actions. I remained standing knee-deep in the heather, 

staring at the mound that hi
d them. I was a battleground 
of fear and curiosity. I did not dare to go back to
wards the pit, but I felt a 
passionate longing to peer in
to it. I began walking, 
therefore, in a big curve, s
eeking some point of vantage 
and continually looking at the sand heaps that hid these 

new-comers to our earth. Once a leash of thin black 

whips, like the arms of an
 octopus, flashed across the 
sunset and was immediately 
with- drawn, and afterwards a thin rod rose up, joint by joint, bearing at its apex a 

circular disk that spun with a wobbling motion. What 
could be going on there? Most of the spectators had gathered in one or two 
groups one a little crowd 
towards Woking, the other a knot of people in the dire
ction of Chobham. Evidently 
The War of the Worlds  
33 of 293 they shared my mental conflict. There were few near me. 
One man I approachedhe was, I perceived, a neighbour 

of mine, though I did not know his nameand accosted. 

But it was scarcely a time for articulate conversation. 
What ugly brutes! he sa
id. Good God! What ugly 
brutes! He repeated th
is over and over again. Did you see a man in the pit? I said; but he made no 
answer to that. We became silent, and stood watching for 

a time side by side, deriving, I fancy, a certain comfort in 

one anothers company. Then 
I shifted my position to a 
little knoll that gave me the advantage of a yard or more 

of elevation and when I looked for him presently he was 

walking towards Woking. 
The sunset faded to twilight before anything further 
happened. The crowd far away on the left, towards 

Woking, seemed to grow, and 
I heard now a faint murmur 
from it. The little knot of people towards Chobham 

dispersed. There was scarcely 
an intimation of movement 
from the pit. 
It was this, as much as 
anything, that gave people 
courage, and I suppose the new arrivals from Woking also 
helped to restore confidence. At any rate, as the dusk 
came on a slow, intermittent movement upon the sand pits 
began, a movement that seemed to gather force as the 
The War of the Worlds  
34 of 293 stillness of the evening about the cylinder remained 
unbroken. Vertical black figures 
in twos and threes would 
advance, stop, watch, and adva
nce again, spreading out as 
they did so in a thin irregular crescent that promised to 

enclose the pit in its attenuated horns. I, too, on my side 

began to move towards the pit. 
Then I saw some cabmen and 
others had walked boldly into the sand pits, and heard 
the clatter of hoofs and the 
gride of wheels. I saw a la
d trundling off the barrow of apples. And then, within thirty
 yards of the 
pit, advancing 
from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little black knot of 

men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag. 
This was the Deputation. There had been a hasty 
consultation, and since the Martians were evidently, in 

spite of their repulsive forms, intelligent creatures, it had 

been resolved to show them, by approaching them with 

signals, that we too were intelligent. 
Flutter, flutter, went the flag, first to the right, then to 
the left. It was too far for me
 to recognise anyone there, 
but afterwards I learned that Ogilvy, Stent, and Henderson were with others in this 
attempt at communication. This 
little group had in its advance dragged inward, so to 
speak, the circumference of the now almost complete 
The War of the Worlds  
35 of 293 circle of people, and a num
ber of dim black figures 
followed it at discreet distances. Suddenly there was a flash of light, and a quantity of 
luminous greenish smoke came out of the pit in three 

distinct puffs, which drove up, one after the other, straight 

into the still air. 
This smoke (or flame, perhaps, would be the better 
word for it) was so bright th
at the deep blue sky overhead 
and the hazy stretches of brown common towards 

Chertsey, set with black pine trees, seemed to darken 

abruptly as these puffs arose, and to remain the darker 

after their dispersal. At the same time a faint hissing 

sound became audible. 
Beyond the pit stood the little wedge of people with 
the white flag at its apex, arrested by these phenomena, a 

little knot of small vertical black shapes upon the black 

ground. As the green smoke arose, their faces flashed out 

pallid green, and faded again as
 it vanished. Then slowly 
the hissing passed into a 
humming, into a long, loud, 
droning noise. Slowly a humped 
shape rose out of the pit, 
and the ghost of a beam of 
light seemed to flicker out 
from it. 
Forthwith flashes of actual flame, a bright glare 
leaping from one to another, sprang from the scattered 
The War of the Worlds  
36 of 293 group of men. It was as if some invisible jet impinged 
upon them and flashed into white flame. It was as if each 

man were suddenly and mome
ntarily turned to fire. Then, by the light of their own destruction, I saw them 
staggering and falling, and their supporters turning to run. I stood staring, not as yet r
ealising that this was death 
leaping from man to man in th
at little distant crowd. All I 
felt was that it was something very strange. An almost 

noise- less and blinding flas
h of light, and a man fell 
headlong and lay still; and as the unseen shaft of heat 
passed over them, pine trees bur
st into fire, and every dry 
furze bush became with one dull thud a mass of flames. 

And far away towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees 

and hedges and wooden buildings suddenly set alight. It was sweeping round sw
iftly and steadily, this 
flaming death, this invisible, 
inevitable sword of heat. I 
perceived it coming towards me by the flashing bushes it 

touched, and was too astounded and stupefied to stir. I 
heard the crackle of fire in 
the sand pits and the sudden 
squeal of a horse that was as suddenly stilled. Then it was 

as if an invisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn 

through the heather between me and the Martians, and all 
along a curving line beyond the sand pits the dark ground 
smoked and crackled. Someth
ing fell with a crash far 
The War of the Worlds  
37 of 293 away to the left where th
e road from Woking station 
opens out on the common. Forth- with the hissing and 

humming ceased, and the blac
k, dome- like object sank 
slowly out of sight into the pit. All this had happened with such swiftness that I had 
stood motionless, dumbfounded and dazzled by the 

flashes of light. Had that de
ath swept through a full circle, it must inevitably have slain me in my surprise. But it 

passed and spared me, and left the night about me 

suddenly dark and un- familiar. 
The undulating common seemed now dark almost to 
blackness, except where its roadways lay grey and pale 

under the deep blue sky of th
e early night. It was dark, 
and suddenly void of men. Overhead the stars were 

mustering, and in the west the sky was still a pale, bright, 

almost greenish blue. The tops of the pine trees and the 

roofs of Horsell came out sh
arp and black against the 
western afterglow. The Martians and their appliances 

were altogether invisible, 
save for that thin mast upon 
which their restless mirror 
wobbled. Patches of bush and 
isolated trees here and there 
smoked and glowed still, and 
the houses towards Woking station were sending up spires 
of flame into the stilln
ess of the evening air. 
The War of the Worlds  
38 of 293 Nothing was changed save for that and a terrible 
astonishment. The little group of black specks with the 

flag of white had been swep
t out of existence, and the 
stillness of the evening, so it seemed to me, had scarcely 

been broken. It came to me that I was upon this dark common, 
helpless, unprotected, and al
one. Suddenly, like a thing 
falling upon me from without, camefear. 
With an effort I turned and began a stumbling run 
through the heather. The fear I felt was no rational fear, but a panic terror 
not only of the Martians, but 
of the dusk and stillness all 
about me. Such an extraordinary effect in unmanning me 

it had that I ran weeping sile
ntly as a ch
ild might do. 
Once I had turned, I did not dare to look back. I remember I felt an extraordinary persuasion that I 
was being played with, that
 presently, when I was upon 
the very verge of safety, this mysterious deathas swift 

as the passage of lightwould leap after me from the pit 

about the cylinder and strike me down. 
The War of the Worlds  
39 of 293 CHAPTER SIX 
 THE HEAT-RAY IN THE CHOBHAM ROAD 
It is still a matter of wonde
r how the Martians are able 
to slay men so swiftly and so silently. Many think that in 

some way they are able to ge
nerate an intense heat in a 
chamber of practically abso
lute non-conductivity. This 
intense heat they project in a parallel beam against any 

object they choose, by mean
s of a polished parabolic 
mirror of unknown composition, much as the parabolic 

mirror of a lighthouse projects a beam of light. But no one 

has absolutely proved these de
tails. However it is done, it 
is certain that a beam of heat
 is the essence of the matter. 
Heat, and invisible, instead of
 visible, light. Whatever is 
combustible flashes into flame 
at its touch, lead runs like 
water, it softens iron, cracks and melts glass, and when it 

falls upon water, incontinently that explodes into steam. 
That night nearly forty pe
ople lay under the starlight about the pit, charred and distorted beyond recognition, 
and all night long the common from Horsell to Maybury 
was deserted and brightly ablaze. 
The War of the Worlds  
40 of 293 The news of the massacre probably reached Chobham, 
Woking, and Ottershaw about the same time. In Woking 

the shops had closed when 
the tragedy happened, and a number of people, shop peopl
e and so forth, attracted by 
the stories they had heard, we
re walking over the Horsell 
Bridge and along the road be
tween the hedges that runs 
out at last upon the comm
on. You may imagine the young 
people brushed up after the labours of the day, and 
making this novelty, as they would make any novelty, the 

excuse for walking together
 and enjoying a trivial 
flirtation. You may figure to
 yourself the hum of voices 
along the road in the gloaming. 
As yet, of course, few people in Woking even knew 
that the cylinder had opene
d, though poor Henderson had 
sent a messenger on a bicycle to the post office with a 

special wire to an evening paper. As these folks came out by twos and threes upon the 
open, they found little knots of
 people talking excitedly 
and peering at the spinning mirror over the sand pits, and 

the new-comers were, no doubt, soon infected by the 

excitement of the occasion. 
By half past eight, when the Deputation was destroyed, 
there may have been a crow
d of three hundred people or 
more at this place, besides those who had left the road to 
The War of the Worlds  
41 of 293 approach the Martians nearer. There were three policemen 
too, one of whom was mounted, doing their best, under 

instructions from Stent, to 
keep the people back and deter 
them from approaching the 
cylinder. There was some 
booing from those more thoughtle
ss and excitable souls to whom a crowd is always an occasion for noise and horse-

play. Stent and Ogilvy, anticipating 
some possibilities of a 
collision, had telegraphed from Horsell to the barracks as 
soon as the Martians emerged, 
for the help of a company 
of soldiers to protect these strange creatures from 

violence. After that they retu
rned to lead that ill-fated 
advance. The description of their death, as it was seen by 

the crowd, tallies very closel
y with my own impressions: 
the three puffs of green smoke, the deep humming note, 

and the flashes of flame. 
But that crowd of people had a far narrower escape 
than mine. Only the fact that a hummock of heathery sand 

intercepted the lower part of
 the Heat-Ray saved them. 
Had the elevation of the parabolic mirror been a few yards 

higher, none could have lived to tell the tale. They saw 

the flashes and the men falling and an invisible hand, as it 
were, lit the bushes as it hu
rried towards them through the 
twilight. Then, with a whistling note that rose above the 
The War of the Worlds  
42 of 293 droning of the pit, the beam 
swung close over 
their heads, lighting the tops of the beech trees that line the road, and 

splitting the bricks, smashing the windows, firing the 

window frames, and bringing down in crumbling ruin a 

portion of the gable of the house nearest the corner. In the sudden thud, hiss, and gl
are of the igniting trees, 
the panic-stricken crowd seems to have swayed 

hesitatingly for some moment
s. Sparks and burning twigs 
began to fall into the road, and single leaves like puffs of 

flame. Hats and dresses caught
 fire. Then came a crying 
from the common. There were shrieks and shouts, and 

suddenly a mounted policeman came galloping through 

the confusion with his hands clasped over his head, 

screaming. 
Theyre coming! a woman shrieked, and 
incontinently everyone was turning and pushing at those 

behind, in order to clear thei
r way to Woking again. They 
must have bolted as blindly as a flock of sheep. Where the road grows narrow and black between the high banks the 

crowd jammed, and a desperate struggle occurred. All that 
crowd did not escape; three persons at least, two women 

and a little boy, were crushed 
and trampled there, and left 
to die amid the terror and the darkness. 
The War of the Worlds  
43 of 293 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 HOW I REACHED HOME For my own part, I rememb
er nothing of my flight 
except the stress of blundering against trees and stumbling 

through the heather. All about 
me gathered the invisible 
terrors of the Martians; that 
pitiless sword of heat seemed 
whirling to and fro, flouris
hing overhead before it 
descended and smote me out of life. I came into the road 

between the crossroads and Hors
ell, and ran along this to 
the crossroads. At last I could go no further; I was exhausted with the 
violence of my emotion and of
 my flight, and I staggered 
and fell by the wayside. That was near the bridge that 

crosses the canal by the gasworks. I fell and lay still. I must have remained there some time. 

I sat up, strangely perplexed. For a moment, perhaps, I 
could not clearly understand how
 I came there. My terror 
had fallen from me like a garment. My hat had gone, and 
my collar had burst away from its fastener. A few minutes 

before, there had only been th
ree real things before me
the immensity of the night a
nd space and na
ture, my own 
The War of the Worlds  
44 of 293 feeble- ness and anguish, and the near approach of death. 
Now it was as if something turned over, and the point of 

view altered abruptly. Ther
e was no sensible transition 
from one state of mind to the 
other. I was immediately the 
self of every day againa d
ecent, ordinary citizen. The 
silent common, the impulse of my flight, the starting 

flames, were as if they had been in a dream. I asked 

myself had these latter things
 indeed happened? I could 
not credit it. 
I rose and walked unsteadily up the steep incline of the 
bridge. My mind was blank 
wonder. My muscles and 
nerves seemed drained of th
eir strength. I dare say I 
staggered drunkenly. A head ro
se over the arch, and the 
figure of a workman carrying 
a basket appeared. Beside 
him ran a little boy. He passed me, wishing me good 

night. I was minded to speak to him, but did not. I 

answered his greeting with a meaningless mumble and 

went on over the bridge. Over the Maybury arch a train, a billowing tumult of 
white, firelit smoke, and a l
ong caterpillar of lighted 
windows, went flying southcla
tter, clatter, clap, rap, 
and it had gone. A dim group of people talked in the gate 
of one of the houses in the pretty little row of gables that 
was called Oriental Terrace. It
 was all so real and so 
The War of the Worlds  
45 of 293 familiar. And that behind me! It was frantic, fantastic! 
Such things, I told myself, could not be. 
Perhaps I am a man of exceptional moods. I do not 
know how far my experien
ce is common. At times I 
suffer from the strangest sense of detachment from myself 

and the world about me; I seem to watch it all from the 

outside, from some- where in
conceivably remote, out of 
time, out of space, out of the stress and tragedy of it all. 

This feeling was very str
ong upon me that night. Here 
was another side to my dream. 
But the trouble was the blank incongruity of this 
serenity and the swift deat
h flying yonder, not two miles 
away. There was a noise of business from the gasworks, 

and the electric lamps were all alight. I stopped at the 

group of people. What news from the common? said I. 

There were two men and a woman at the gate. 

Eh? said one of the men, turning. 

What news from the common? I said. 

Aint yer just BEEN there? asked the men. 

People seem fair silly a
bout the common, said the 
woman over the gate. Whats it all abart? 
Havent you heard of the men 
from Mars? said I; the 
creatures from Mars? 
The War of the Worlds  
46 of 293 Quite enough, said the woman over the gate. 
Thenks"; and all three of them laughed. 
I felt foolish and angry. I tried and found I could not 
tell them what I had seen. They laughed again at my 

broken sentences. Youll hear more yet, I 
said, and went on to my 
home. 
I startled my wife at the doorway, so haggard was I. I 
went into the dining room, 
sat down, drank some wine, 
and so soon as I could collect
 myself sufficiently I told 
her the things I had seen. Th
e dinner, which was a cold 
one, had already been served, and remained neglected on 

the table while I told my story. 
There is one thing, I said, to allay the fears I had 
aroused; they are the most 
sluggish things I ever saw 
crawl. They may keep the pit and kill people who come 

near them, but they cannot get out of it. But the horror 

of them! 
Dont, dear! said my wife, knitting her brows and 
putting her hand on mine. 
Poor Ogilvy! I said. To th
ink he may be lying dead 
there! 
The War of the Worlds  
47 of 293 My wife at least did not fi
nd my experience incredible. 
When I saw how deadly white her face was, I ceased 

abruptly. They may come here, she said again and again. 

I pressed her to take wine, and tried to reassure her. 
They can scarcely move, I said. 

I began to comfort her and myself by repeating all that 
Ogilvy had told me of the im
possibility of the Martians 
establishing themselves on the earth. In particular I laid 

stress on the gravitational diffi
culty. On the surface of the 
earth the force of gravity is three times what it is on the 

surface of Mars. A Martian, th
erefore, would weigh three 
times more than on Mars, albeit his muscular strength 

would be the same. His own body 
would be a cope of lead to him. That, indeed, was the general opinion. Both THE 

TIMES and the DAILY TELEGRAPH, for instance, 

insisted on it the next morn
ing, and both overlooked, just as I did, two obvious modifying influences. 
The atmosphere of the ear
th, we now know, contains 
far more oxygen or far less argon (whichever way one 

likes to put it) than does Mars. The invigorating 

influences of this excess of oxygen upon the Martians 
indisputably did much to 
counterbalance the increased weight of their bodies. And, in
 the second place, we all 
The War of the Worlds  
48 of 293 overlooked the fact that such 
mechanical intelligence as 
the Martian possessed was quite able to dispense with 

muscular exertion at a pinch. But I did not consider these points at the time, and so 
my reasoning was dead against the chances of the 

invaders. With wine and f
ood, the confidence of my own 
table, and the necessity of r
eassuring my wife, I grew by 
insensible degrees courageous and secure. They have done a foolish thing, said I, fingering my 
wineglass. They are danger
ous because, no doubt, they 
are mad with terror. Perhaps they expected to find no 

living thingscertainly no intelligent living things. 
A shell in the pit said I, if the worst comes to the 
worst will kill them all. 
The intense excitement of the events had no doubt left 
my perceptive powers in a state of erethism. I remember 

that dinner table with extraordinary vividness even now. 

My dear wifes sweet anxious
 face peering at me from 
under the pink lamp shade, the 
white cloth with its silver 
and glass table furniturefor in those days even 
philosophical writers had 
many little luxuriesthe 
crimson-purple wine in my 
glass, are photographically 
distinct. At the end of it I 
sat, tempering nuts with a 
The War of the Worlds  
49 of 293 cigarette, regretting Ogil
vys rashness, and denouncing 
the shortsighted timidity of the Martians. 
So some respectable dodo in
 the Mauritius might have 
lorded it in his nest, and di
scussed the arrival of that 
shipful of pitiless sailors in 
want of animal food. We will 
peck them to death tomorrow, my dear. 
I did not know it, but that was the last civilised dinner I 
was to eat for very many 
strange and terrible days. The War of the Worlds  
50 of 293 CHAPTER EIGHT 
 FRIDAY NIGHT The most extraordinary thi
ng to my mind, of all the 
strange and wonderful things that happened upon that 

Friday, was the dovetailing of the commonplace habits of 

our social order with the first beginnings of the series of 

events that was to topple th
at social order headlong. If on 
Friday night you had taken a pair of compasses and drawn 

a circle with a radius of fi
ve miles round the Woking sand 
pits, I doubt if you would have had one human being 

outside it, unless it were some relation of Stent or of the 

three or four cyclists or 
London people lying dead on the 
common, whose emotions or habi
ts were at all affected by 
the new-comers. Many people had heard of the cylinder, 

of course, and talked about 
it in their leisure, but it 
certainly did not make the sensation that an ultimatum to 

Germany would have done. 
In London that night poor Hendersons telegram 
describing the gradual unscrewing of the shot was judged 
to be a canard, and his evening paper, after wiring for 
The War of the Worlds  
51 of 293 authentication from him and receiving no replythe man 
was killeddecided not to print a special edition. 
Even within the five-mile circle the great majority of 
people were inert. I have al
ready described the behaviour of the men and women to whom I spoke. All over the 

district people were dini
ng and supping; working men 
were gardening after the labours of the day, children were 

being put to bed, young peopl
e were wandering through 
the lanes love-making, students sat over their books. 
Maybe there was a murmur in the village streets, a 
novel and dominant topic in 
the public-houses, and here and there a messenger, or even an eye-witness of the later 

occurrences, caused a whirl of excitement, a shouting, and 

a running to and fro; but fo
r the most part the daily 
routine of working, eating, dr
inking, sleeping, went on as 
it had done for count- less yearsas though no planet 

Mars existed in the sky. Ev
en at Woking station and 
Horsell and Chobham that was the case. 
In Woking junction, until a late hour, trains were 
stopping and going on, others were shunting on the 

sidings, passengers were alighting and waiting, and 

everything was proceeding in 
the most ordinary way. A 
boy from the town, trenching on Smiths monopoly, was 
selling papers with the afternoons news. The ringing 
The War of the Worlds  
52 of 293 impact of trucks, the sharp whistle of the engines from the 
junction, mingled with their s
houts of Men from Mars! 
Excited men came into the station about nine oclock with 

incredible tidings, and cause
d no more disturbance than 
drunkards might have done. 
People rattling Londonwards peered into the darkness out
side the carriage windows, 
and saw only a rare, flickering, vanishing spark dance up 
from the direction of Horsell, a red glow and a thin veil of 

smoke driving across the star
s, and thought that nothing 
more serious than a heath fi
re was happening. It was only 
round the edge of the common that any disturbance was 

perceptible. There were half 
a dozen villas burning on the 
Woking border. There were li
ghts in all the houses on the 
common side of the three villa
ges, and the people there 
kept awake till dawn. 
A curious crowd lingered 
restlessly, people coming 
and going but the crowd remaining, both on the Chobham 

and Horsell bridges. One or tw
o adventurous souls, it was 
after- wards found, went into
 the darkness and crawled 
quite near the Martians; but 
they never returned, for now 
and again a light-ray, like the beam of a warships 

searchlight swept the common, and the Heat-Ray was 
ready to follow. Save for su
ch, that big area of common 
was silent and desolate, and the charred bodies lay about 
The War of the Worlds  
53 of 293 on it all night under the stars, and all the next day. A noise of hammering from the pit was heard by many people. 
So you have the state of things on Friday night. In the 
centre, sticking into the skin of our old planet Earth like a 

poisoned dart, was this cylinder. But the poison was 

scarcely working yet. Around 
it was a patch of silent 
common, smouldering in places, and with a few dark, 

dimly seen objects lying in c
ontorted attitudes here and 
there. Here and there was a burning bush or tree. Beyond 

was a fringe of excitement, and farther than that fringe the 

inflammation had not crept as yet. In the rest of the world 

the stream of life still flowed as it had flowed for 

immemorial years. The fever 
of war that would presently 
clog vein and artery, deaden 
nerve and destroy brain, had still to develop. All night long the Martians were hammering and 
stirring, sleepless, indefatigable, at work upon the 

machines they were making 
ready, and ever and again a 
puff of greenish- white smoke whirled up to the starlit 

sky. About eleven a company of soldiers came through 
Horsell, and deployed along the edge of the common to 
form a cordon. Later a second company marched through 
Chobham to deploy on the north side of the common. 
The War of the Worlds  
54 of 293 Several officers from the Inkerman barracks had been on 
the common earlier in the day, and one, Major Eden, was 

reported to be missing. The col
onel of the regiment came 
to the Chobham bridge a
nd was busy questioning the crowd at midnight. The military authorities were certainly 

alive to the seriousness of the business. About eleven, the 

next mornings papers were 
able to say, a squadron of 
hussars, two Maxims, and about four hundred men of the 

Cardigan regiment started from Aldershot. 
A few seconds after midnight the crowd in the 
Chertsey road, Woking, saw a star fall from heaven into 

the pine woods to the northwest. It had a greenish colour, 

and caused a silent brightne
ss like summer lightning. This 
was the second cylinder. 
The War of the Worlds  
55 of 293 CHAPTER NINE 
 THE FIGHTING BEGINS Saturday lives in my memory as a day of suspense. It 
was a day of lassitude too, hot and close, with, I am told, 

a rapidly fluctuating baromete
r. I had slept but little, 
though my wife had succeeded in sleeping, and I rose 

early. I went into my garden
 before breakfast and stood 
listening, but towards the common there was nothing 
stirring but a lark. The milkman came as usual. 
I heard the rattle of his 
chariot and I went round to the side gate to ask the latest 

news. He told me that during the night the Martians had 

been surrounded by troops, and that guns were expected. 

Thena familiar, reassuring noteI heard a train 

running towards Woking. 
They arent to be killed, said the milkman, if that 
can possibly be avoided. I saw my neighbour gardening, chatted with him for a 
time, and then strolled in to 
breakfast. It was a most un- 
exceptional morning. My neighbour was of opinion that 
The War of the Worlds  
56 of 293 the troops would be able to capture or to destroy the 
Martians during the day. Its a pity they make them
selves so unapproachable, 
he said. It would be curious
 to know how 
they live on 
another planet; we might learn a thing or two. 
He came up to the fence and extended a handful of 
straw- berries, for his garden
ing was as generous as it was 
enthusiastic. At the same time 
he told me of the burning 
of the pine woods about the Byfleet Golf Links. They say, said he, that 
theres another of those 
blessed things fallen therenumber two. But ones 

enough, surely. This lotll cost the insurance people a 

pretty penny before everythings settled. He laughed with an air of the greatest good 
humour as he said this. The 
woods, he said, were still burning, and pointed out a haze 

of smoke to me. They will be
 hot under foot for days, on 
account of the thick soil of pine
 needles and turf, he said, 
and then grew serious over poor Ogilvy. After breakfast, instead of 
working, I decided to walk 
down towards the common. Under the railway bridge I 

found a group of soldierssappers, I think, men in small 

round caps, dirty red jackets unbuttoned, and showing 
their blue shirts, dark trous
ers, and boots coming to the 
calf. They told me no one was allowed over the canal, 
The War of the Worlds  
57 of 293 and, looking along the road towards the bridge, I saw one 
of the Cardigan men standing sentinel there. I talked with 

these soldiers for a time; I told them of my sight of the 

Martians on the previous even
ing. None of them had seen 
the Martians, and they had but the vaguest ideas of them, 

so that they plied me with questions. They said that they 

did not know who had authorised the movements of the 

troops; their idea was that a dispute had arisen at the 

Horse Guards. The ordinary sapper is a great deal better 

educated than the common soldier, and they discussed the 

peculiar conditions of the 
possible fight with some 
acuteness. I described the Heat-Ray to them, and they 

began to argue among themselves. 
Crawl up under cover and rush em, say I, said one. 
Get aht!, said another. Whats cover against this ere 
eat? Sticks to cook yer! What we got to do is to go as 

near as the groundll let us, and then drive a trench. Blow yer trenches! You always want trenches; you 
ought to ha been born a rabbit Snippy. Aint they got any necks, then? said a third, 
abruptly a little, contemplative, dark man, smoking a 

pipe. I repeated my description. 
The War of the Worlds  
58 of 293 Octopuses, said he, thats what I calls em. Talk 
about fishers of menfighters 
of fish it is this time! 
It aint no murder killing beasts like that, said the 
first speaker. 
Why not shell the darned things strite off and finish 
em? said the little dark 
man. You carn tell what they 
might do. 
Wheres your shells? said
 the first speaker. There 
aint no time. Do it in a rush, thats my tip, and do it at 

once. So they discussed it. After a while I left them, and 
went on to the railway stat
ion to get as many morning 
papers as I could. But I will not weary the read
er with a description of 
that long morning and of the longer afternoon. I did not 

succeed in getting a glimpse of the common, for even 

Horsell and Chobham church towers were in the hands of 

the military authorities. The soldiers I addressed didnt 

know anything; the officers we
re mysterious as well as 
busy. I found people in the town quite secure again in the 

presence of the military, and I heard for the first time 

from Marshall, the tobacconist, that his son was among 
the dead on the common. The soldiers had made the 
The War of the Worlds  
59 of 293 people on the outskirts of Ho
rsell lock up and leave their 
houses. I got back to lunch about two, 
very tired for, as I have 
said, the day was extremely hot and dull; and in order to 

refresh myself I took a cold 
bath in the afternoon. About 
half past four I went up to 
the railway station to get an 
evening paper, for the morning papers had contained only 

a very inaccurate description of the killing of Stent, 

Henderson, Ogilvy, and the others. But there was little I 
didnt know. The Martians did not show an inch of 

themselves. They seemed busy in their pit, and there was 

a sound of hammering and an almost continuous streamer 

of smoke. Apparently they we
re busy getting ready for a 
struggle. Fresh attempts have been made to signal, but 

without success, was the st
ereo- typed formula of the 
papers. A sapper told me it was done by a man in a ditch 

with a flag on a long pole. 
The Martians took as much 
notice of such advances as 
we should of the lowing of a 
cow. I must confess the sight of all this armament, all this 
preparation, greatly excite
d me. My imagination became 
belligerent, and defeated the 
invaders in a dozen striking 
ways; something of my schoolboy dreams of battle and 
The War of the Worlds  
60 of 293 heroism came back. It hardly seemed a fair fight to me at 
that time. They seemed very he
lpless in that pit of theirs. 
About three oclock there began the thud of a gun at 
measured intervals from Chertsey or Addlestone. I 

learned that the smouldering pine wood into which the 

second cylinder had fallen was being shelled, in the hope 
of destroying that object be
fore it opened. It was only 
about five, however, that 
a field gun reached Chobham 
for use against the first body of Martians. About six in the evening, as I sat at tea with my wife in 
the summerhouse talking vigorous
ly about the battle that 
was lowering upon us, I heard 
a muffled detonation from 
the common, and immediately af
ter a gust of firing. Close 
on the heels of that came a 
violent rattling crash, quite close to us, that shook the 
ground; and, starting out upon 
the lawn, I saw the tops of 
the trees about the Oriental 
College burst into smoky red flame, and the tower of the 

little church beside it slid
e down into ruin. The pinnacle 
of the mosque had vanished, and the roof line of the 

college itself looked as if a hundred-ton gun had been at 

work upon it. One of our chimneys cracked as if a shot 

had hit it, flew, and a piece of
 it came clattering down the 
tiles and made a heap of broken red fragments upon the 
flower bed by my study window. 
The War of the Worlds  
61 of 293 I and my wife stood amazed. Then I realised that the 
crest of Maybury Hill must 
be within range of the 
Martians Heat- Ray now that the college was cleared out 

of the way. At that I gripped my wifes arm, and without ceremony 
ran her out into the 
road. Then I fetche
d out the servant, 
telling her I would go upstairs myself for the box she was 
clamouring for. 
We cant possibly stay here, I said; and as I spoke the 
firing reopened for a moment upon the common. 
But where are we to go? 
said my wife in terror. 
I thought perplexed. Then I re
membered her cousins at 
Leatherhead. 
Leatherhead! I shouted above the sudden noise. 
She looked away from me downhill. The people were 
coming out of their houses, astonished. 
How are we to get to Leatherhead? she said. 

Down the hill I saw a bevy of hussars ride under the 
railway bridge; three galloped through the open gates of the Oriental College; two ot
hers dismounted, and began 
running from house to house. The sun, shining through 

the smoke that drove up from the tops of the trees, seemed 
blood red, and threw an unf
amiliar lurid light upon 
everything. The War of the Worlds  
62 of 293 Stop here, said I; you are safe here"; and I started off at once for the Spotted Dog, for I knew the landlord had a 

horse and dog cart. I ran, for I 
perceived that in a moment 
everyone upon this side of the hill would be moving. I 

found him in his bar, quite unaware of what was going on 

behind his house. A man stood with his back to me, 

talking to him. 
I must have a pound, said the landlord, and Ive no 
one to drive it. Ill give you two, said I, over the strangers shoulder. What for? 

And Ill bring it back by midnight, I said. 

Lord! said the landlord;
 whats the hurry? Im 
selling my bit of a pig. Two pounds, and you bring it 

back? Whats going on now? 
I explained hastily that I ha
d to leave my home, and so 
secured the dog cart. At the time it did not seem to me 

nearly so urgent that the la
ndlord should leave his. I took 
care to have the cart there and then, drove it off down the 

road, and, leaving it in charge
 of my wife and servant, 
rushed into my house and pack
ed a few valuables, such 
plate as we had, and so fort
h. The beech trees below the 
house were burning while I did 
this, and the palings up 
the road glowed red. While I was occupied in this way, 
The War of the Worlds  
63 of 293 one of the dismounted hussars came running up. He was 
going from house to house, wa
rning people to leave. He 
was going on as I came out of my front door, lugging my 

treasures, done up in a tablecloth. I shouted after him: 
What news? 

He turned, stared, bawled 
something about crawling 
out in a thing like a dish cover, and ran on to the gate of 

the house at the crest. A s
udden whirl of black smoke 
driving across the road hid hi
m for a moment. I ran to my 
neighbours door and rapped to 
satisfy myself of what I 
already knew, that his wife 
had gone to London with him 
and had locked up their house. I went in again, according 

to my promise, to get my 
servants box, lugged it out, 
clapped it beside her on the 
tail of the dog cart, and then 
caught the reins and jumped 
up into the drivers seat 
beside my wife. In another mo
ment we were clear of the 
smoke and noise, and spanking down the opposite slope 

of Maybury Hill towards Old Woking. 
In front was a quiet sunny landscape, a wheat field 
ahead on either side of th
e road, and the Maybury Inn with its swinging sign. I saw th
e doctors cart ahead of 
me. At the bottom of the hill 
I turned my head to look at 
the hillside I was leaving. Thick streamers of black smoke 
shot with threads of red fire were driving up into the still 
The War of the Worlds  
64 of 293 air, and throwing dark shadows upon the green treetops 
eastward. The smoke already extended far away to the 

east and westto the By- fleet pine woods eastward, and 

to Woking on the west. The road was dotted with people 

running towards us. And very fa
int now, but ve
ry distinct 
through the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a 

machine-gun that was presently stilled, and an 

intermittent cracking of rifles. Apparently the Martians 

were setting fire to everything within range of their Heat-

Ray. I am not an expert driver
, and I had immediately to 
turn my attention to the hor
se. When I looked back again 
the second hill had hidden the black smoke. I slashed the 

horse with the whip, and gave him a loose rein until 

Woking and Send lay between us and that quivering 
tumult. I overtook and passed the doctor between Woking 

and Send. The War of the Worlds  
65 of 293 CHAPTER TEN 
 IN THE STORM Leatherhead is about twelve miles from Maybury Hill. 
The scent of hay was in the 
air through the lush meadows 
beyond Pyrford, and the hedges on either side were sweet 
and gay with multitudes of dog-roses. The heavy firing 

that had broken out while we were driving down Maybury 
Hill ceased as abruptly as it began, leaving the evening 

very peaceful and still. We 
got to Leatherhead without 
misadventure about nine ocl
ock, and the horse had an 
hours rest while I took supper with my cousins and 

commended my wife to their care. 
My wife was curiously silent
 throughout the drive, and 
seemed oppressed with forebodings of evil. I talked to her 

reassuringly, pointing out that the Martians were tied to 

the Pit by sheer heaviness, a
nd at the utmost could but 
crawl a little out of it; but she answered only in 
monosyllables. Had it not been for my promise to the 
innkeeper, she would, I think, have urged me to stay in 

Leatherhead that night. Woul
d that I had! Her face, I 
remember, was very white as we parted. 
The War of the Worlds  
66 of 293 For my own part, I had been feverishly excited all day. 
Something very like the war 
fever that occas
ionally runs 
through a civilised community had got into my blood, and 

in my heart I was not so very sorry that I had to return to 

Maybury that night. I was even
 afraid that that last 
fusillade I had heard might mean the extermination of our 

invaders from Mars. I can best
 express my state of mind 
by saying that I wanted to be in at the death. It was nearly eleven when I started to return. The night 
was unexpectedly dark; to me, walking out of the lighted 

passage of my cousins house,
 it seemed indeed black, 
and it was as hot and close as the day. Overhead the 

clouds were driving fast, albe
it not a breath stirred the 
shrubs about us. My cousins man lit both lamps. Happily, 

I knew the road intimately. My wife stood in the light of 

the doorway, and watched me until I jumped up into the 

dog cart. Then abruptly she turned and went in, leaving 

my cousins side by side wishing me good hap. 
I was a little depressed at 
first with the contagion of 
my wifes fears, but very soon my thoughts reverted to 

the Martians. At that time I was absolutely in the dark as 

to the course of the evenings fighting. I did not know 
even the circumstances that had precipitated the conflict. 
As I came through Ockham (for that was the way I 
The War of the Worlds  
67 of 293 returned, and not through 
Send and Old Woking) I saw 
along the western horizon a blood-red glow, which as I 

drew nearer, crept slowly up the sky. The driving clouds 

of the gathering thunder- storm mingled there with masses 
of black and red smoke. 
Ripley Street was deserte
d, and except for a lighted 
window or so the village showed not a sign of life; but I 

narrowly escaped an accident at the corner of the road to 

Pyrford, where a knot of people 
stood with their backs to 
me. They said nothing to me
 as I passed. I do not know 
what they knew of the things happening beyond the hill, 

nor do I know if the silent
 houses I passed on my way 
were sleeping securely, or
 deserted and empty, or 
harassed and watching against the terror of the night. From Ripley until I came 
through Pyrford I was in the 
valley of the Wey, and the re
d glare was hidden from me. 
As I ascended the little hill beyond Pyrford Church the 

glare came into view again, and the trees about me 

shivered with the first intimation of the storm that was 

upon me. Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford 

Church behind me, and then came the silhouette of 

Maybury Hill, with its tree- 
tops and roofs black and 
sharp against the red. The War of the Worlds  
68 of 293 Even as I beheld this a lu
rid green glare lit the road 
about me and showed the distant woods towards 

Addlestone. I felt a tug at the 
reins. I saw that the driving 
clouds had been pierced as it 
were by a thread of green 
fire, suddenly lighting their confusion and falling into the 
field to my left. It was the third falling star! 
Close on its apparition, and blindingly violet by 
contrast, danced out the firs
t lightning of the gathering 
storm, and the thunder burst li
ke a rocket overhead. The 
horse took the bit between his teeth and bolted. A moderate incline runs towards the foot of Maybury 
Hill, and down this we clattered. Once the lightning had 

begun, it went on in as rapid a succession of flashes as I 

have ever seen. The thunde
rclaps, treading one on the heels of another and w
ith a strange crackling 
accompaniment, sounded more like the working of a 

gigantic electric machine than the usual detonating 

reverberations. The flickering light was blinding and 
confusing, and a thin hail sm
ote gustily at my face as I 
drove down the slope. At first I regarded little but
 the road before me, and 
then abruptly my attention wa
s arrested by something that 
was moving rapidly down th
e opposite slope of Maybury 
Hill. At first I took it for th
e wet roof of a house, but one 
The War of the Worlds  
69 of 293 flash following another showed it to be in swift rolling 
movement. It was an elus
ive visiona moment of 
bewildering darkness, and then, in a flash like daylight, 
the red masses of the Orphanage near the crest of the hill, 

the green tops of the pine 
trees, and this 
problematical 
object came out clear an
d sharp and bright. And this Thing I saw! How can I describe it? A 
monstrous tripod, higher than
 many houses, striding over 
the young pine trees, and smashing them aside in its 

career; a walking engine of glittering metal, striding now 

across the heather; articulate 
ropes of steel dangling from 
it, and the clattering tumult of
 its passage mingling with 
the riot of the thunder. A fl
ash, and it came out vividly, 
heeling over one way with two f
eet in the air, to vanish 
and reappear almost instantly as it seemed, with the next 

flash, a hundred yards nearer. Can you imagine a milking 

stool tilted and bowled violen
tly along the ground? That 
was the impression those inst
ant flashes gave. But instead of a milking stool imagine it 
a great body of machinery on 
a tripod stand. Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me 
were parted, as brittle reeds 
are parted by a man thrusting 
through them; they were 
snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tr
ipod appeared, rushing, as 
The War of the Worlds  
70 of 293 it seemed, headlong toward
s me. And I was galloping 
hard to meet it! At the sight of the second monster my 

nerve went altogether. Not stopping to look again, I 

wrenched the horses head hard
 round to the right and in 
another moment the dog cart had heeled over upon the 

horse; the shafts smashe
d noisily, and I was flung sideways and fell heavily into a shallow pool of water. I crawled out almost immediately, and crouched, my 
feet still in the water, unde
r a clump of furze. The horse 
lay motionless (his neck wa
s broken, poor brute!) and by 
the lightning flashes I saw the black bulk of the 

overturned dog cart and the silhouette of the wheel still 

spinning slowly. In another moment the colossal 

mechanism went striding by me, and passed uphill 

towards Pyrford. 
Seen nearer, the Thing was incredibly strange, for it 
was no mere insensate mach
ine driving on its way. 
Machine it was, with a ringi
ng metallic pace, and long, 
flexible, glittering tentacles
 (one of which gripped a 
young pine tree) swinging and rattling about its strange 

body. It picked its road as it 
went striding along, and the 
brazen hood that surmounted it moved to and fro with the 
inevitable suggestion of a head looking about. Behind the 
main body was a huge mass of wh
ite metal like a gigantic 
The War of the Worlds  
71 of 293 fishermans basket, and puffs 
of green smoke squirted out 
from the joints of the limbs
 as the monster swept by me. 
And in an instant it was gone. So much I saw then, all vaguely for the flickering of 
the lightning, in blinding highlights and dense black 

shadows. As it passed it set up an exultant deafening howl that 
drowned the thunderAloo! Aloo!and in another 
minute it was with its companion, half a mile away, 

stooping over something in the 
field. I have no doubt this 
Thing in the field was the third of the ten cylinders they 

had fired at us from Mars. 
For some minutes I lay there 
in the rain and darkness 
watching, by the intermittent light, these monstrous 

beings of metal moving about
 in the distance over the 
hedge tops. A thin hail was 
now beginning, and as it came 
and went their figures grew misty and then flashed into 

clearness again. Now and then came a gap in the 

lightning, and the night swallowed them up. 
I was soaked with hail a
bove and puddle water below. 
It was some time before my blank astonishment would let 

me struggle up the bank to a drier position, or think at all 
of my imminent peril. 
The War of the Worlds  
72 of 293 Not far from me was a little one-roomed squatters hut 
of wood, surrounded by a patc
h of potato garden. I 
struggled to my feet at la
st, and, crouching and making 
use of every chance of cover, I made a run for this. I 

hammered at the door, but I 
could not make the people 
hear (if there were any people 
inside), and after a time I 
desisted, and, availing myself 
of a ditch for the greater 
part of the way, succeeded in crawling, unobserved by 

these monstrous machines, into the pine woods towards 

Maybury. Under cover of this I pus
hed on, wet and shivering now, towards my own house. I walked among the trees 

trying to find the footpath. It was very dark indeed in the 

wood, for the lightning was now becoming infrequent, 

and the hail, which was pouring 
down in a torrent, fell in 
columns through the gaps in the heavy foliage. 
If I had fully realised the meaning of all the things I 
had seen I should have im
mediately worked my way 
round through Byfleet to St
reet Cobham, and so gone 
back to rejoin my wife at Leatherhead. But that night the 

strangeness of things about me, and my physical 

wretchedness, prevented me, 
for I was bruised, weary, 
wet to the skin, deafened 
and blinded by the storm. The War of the Worlds  
73 of 293 I had a vague idea of going on to my own house, and 
that was as much motive as I had. I staggered through the 

trees, fell into a ditch and bruised my knees against a 

plank, and finally splashed out into the lane that ran down 

from the College Arms. I say splashed, for the storm 

water was sweeping the sand down the hill in a muddy 

torrent. There in the darkne
ss a man blundered into me 
and sent me reeling back. 
He gave a cry of terror, sprang sideways, and rushed 
on before I could gather my wits sufficiently to speak to 

him. So heavy was the stress of the storm just at this place 

that I had the hardest task to win my way up the hill. I 

went close up to the fence on the left and worked my way 

along its palings. Near the top I stumbled upon something soft, and, by a 
flash of lightning, saw between my feet a heap of black 

broad- cloth and a pair of
 boots. Before I could 
distinguish clearly how the ma
n lay, the flicker of light 
had passed. I stood over him waiting for the next flash. 

When it came, I saw that he was a sturdy man, cheaply 

but not shabbily dressed; 
his head was bent under his 
body, and he lay crumpled up close to the fence, as 
though he had been flung violently against it. The War of the Worlds  
74 of 293 Overcoming the repugnance 
natural to one who had 
never before touched a dead body, I stooped and turned 

him over to feel for his heart. He was quite dead. 

Apparently his neck had been broken. The lightning 

flashed for a third time, and his face leaped upon me. I 

sprang to my feet. It was the 
landlord of the Spotted Dog, 
whose conveyance I had taken. I stepped over him gingerly and pushed on up the hill. 
I made my way by the polic
e station and the College Arms towards my own house. Nothing was burning on the 

hillside, though from the common there still came a red 

glare and a rolling tumult of ruddy smoke beating up 

against the drenching hail. So far as I could see by the 

flashes, the houses about me 
were mostly uninjured. By 
the College Arms a dark heap lay in the road. 
Down the road towards Maybury Bridge there were 
voices and the sound of feet, but I had not the courage to 

shout or to go to them. I let 
myself in with my latchkey, 
closed, locked and bolted the 
door, staggered to the foot 
of the staircase, and sat dow
n. My imagination was full of 
those striding metallic mons
ters, and of the dead body 
smashed against the fence. 
I crouched at the foot of the staircase with my back to 
the wall, shivering violently. 
The War of the Worlds  
75 of 293 CHAPTER ELEVEN  AT THE WINDOW 
I have already said that my storms of emotion have a 
trick of exhausting themselves
. After a time I discovered 
that I was cold and wet, and 
with little pools of water 
about me on the stair carpet. I got up almost 

mechanically, went into the dining room and drank some 

whiskey, and then I was moved to change my clothes. 
After I had done that I went
 upstairs to my study, but 
why I did so I do not know. The window of my study 

looks over the trees and the railway towards Horsell 

Common. In the hurry of our 
departure this window had 
been left open. The passage was dark, and, by contrast 

with the picture the window 
frame enclosed, the side of 
the room seemed impenetrably
 dark. I stopped short in the 
doorway. The thunderstorm had passe
d. The towers of the 
Oriental College and the pine
 trees about it had gone, and 
very far away, lit by a vivid 
red glare, the common about 
the sand pits was visible. 
Across the light huge black 
shapes, grotesque and strange, moved busily to and fro. 
The War of the Worlds  
76 of 293 It seemed indeed as if 
the whole country in that 
direction was on firea broa
d hillside set with minute 
tongues of flame, swaying and 
writhing with the gusts of 
the dying storm, and throwing a red reflection upon the 

cloud scud above. Every now and then a haze of smoke 

from some nearer conflagr
ation drove across the window and hid the Martian shapes. I could not see what they 
were doing, nor the clear form of them, nor recognise the 

black objects they were bus
ied upon. Neither could I see 
the nearer fire, though the refl
ections of it danced on the 
wall and ceiling of the study. A sharp, resinous tang of 

burning was in the air. I closed the door noiseless
ly and crept towards the 
window. As I did so, the view opened out until, on the 

one hand, it reached to the hous
es about Woking station, 
and on the other to the charred and blackened pine woods 

of Byfleet. There was a light
 down below the hill, on the 
railway, near the arch, and se
veral of the houses along the 
Maybury road and the street
s near the station were 
glowing ruins. The light upon the railway puzzled me at 

first; there were a black heap 
and a vivid glare, and to the 
right of that a row of yello
w oblongs. Then I perceived 
this was a wrecked train, the fore part smashed and on 
fire, the hinder carriages still upon the rails. The War of the Worlds  
77 of 293 Between these three main centres of lightthe houses, 
the train, and the burning county towards Chobham 
stretched irregular patches of
 dark country, broken here 
and there by intervals of
 dimly glowing and smoking 
ground. It was the strangest spectacle, that black expanse 

set with fire. It reminded me, 
more than anything else, of 
the Potteries at night. At 
first I could distinguish no people at all, though I peered intently for them. Later I 

saw against the light of Woki
ng station a number of black 
figures hurrying one after the other across the line. 
And this was the little world in which I had been living 
securely for years, this fier
y chaos! What had happened in 
the last seven hours I still did not know; nor did I know, 

though I was beginning to gue
ss, the relation between 
these mechanical colossi a
nd the sluggish lumps I had 
seen disgorged from the cylinder. With a queer feeling of 

impersonal interest I turned 
my desk chair to the window, 
sat down, and stared at the blackened country, and 

particularly at the three giga
ntic black things that were 
going to and fro in the glare about the sand pits. They seemed amazingly busy. I began to ask myself 
what they could be. Were they intelligent mechanisms? 
Such a thing I felt was impo
ssible. Or did a Martian sit 
within each, ruling, directi
ng, using, much as a mans 
The War of the Worlds  
78 of 293 brain sits and rules in his 
body? I began to compare the 
things to human ma- chines, to ask myself for the first 

time in my life how an ironclad or a steam engine would 

seem to an intelligent lower animal. 
The storm had left the sky cl
ear, and over the smoke of 
the burning land the little 
fading pinpoint of Mars was 
dropping into the west, when a soldier came into my 

garden. I heard a slight scraping at the fence, and rousing 

myself from the lethargy that had fallen upon me, I 

looked down and saw him di
mly, clambering over the 
palings. At the sight of anot
her human being my torpor 
passed, and I leaned out of the window eagerly. Hist! said I, in a whisper. 

He stopped astride of the fence in doubt. Then he came 
over and across the lawn to th
e corner of the house. He 
bent down and stepped softly. Whos there? he said, also whispering, standing 
under the window and peering up. Where are you going? I asked. 

God knows. 
Are you trying to hide? 

Thats it. 
Come into the house, I said. 
The War of the Worlds  
79 of 293 I went down, unfastened the door, and let him in, and 
locked the door again. I coul
d not see his face. He was 
hatless, and his coat was unbuttoned. My God! he said, as I drew him in. 

What has happened? I asked. 

What hasnt? In the obscur
ity I could see he made a 
gesture of despair. They wi
ped us outsimply wiped us 
out, he repeated again and again. He followed me, almost mechanically, into the dining 
room. 
Take some whiskey, I said, pouring out a stiff dose. 

He drank it. Then abruptly he sat down before the 
table, put his head on his arms, and began to sob and 

weep like a little boy, in a 
perfect passion of emotion, 
while I, with a curious forgetfulness of my own recent 

despair, stood beside him, wondering. It was a long time before he could steady his nerves to 
answer my questions, and then
 he answered perplexingly 
and brokenly. He was a driver in the artillery, and had 

only come into action about se
ven. At that time firing was 
going on across the common, and it was said the first 

party of Martians were crawling slowly towards their 
second cylinder under cover of a metal shield. 
The War of the Worlds  
80 of 293 Later this shield staggere
d up on tripod legs and 
became the first of the fighting-machines I had seen. The 

gun he drove had been unlimbered near Horsell, in order 

to command the sand pits, and its arrival it was that had 

precipitated the action. As th
e limber gunners went to the 
rear, his horse trod in a rabbit hole and came down, 

throwing him into a depression
 of the ground. At the same 
moment the gun exploded behind him, the ammunition 

blew up, there was fire all about him, and he found 

himself lying under a heap of charred dead men and dead 

horses. I lay still, he said, scared out of my wits, with the 
fore quarter of a horse atop 
of me. Wed been wiped out. 
And the smellgood God! Like burnt meat! I was hurt 

across the back by the fall of th
e horse, and there I had to 
lie until I felt better. Just lik
e parade it had been a minute 
before then stumble, bang, swish! 
Wiped out! he said. 

He had hid under the dead 
horse for a long time, 
peeping out furtively across the common. The Cardigan 
men had tried a rush, in skir
mishing order, at the pit, 
simply to be swept out of existence. Then the monster had 
risen to its feet and had begun 
to walk leisurely to and fro 
across the common among the few fugitives, with its 
The War of the Worlds  
81 of 293 headlike hood turning about ex
actly like the head of a 
cowled human being. A kind of
 arm carried a complicated 
metallic case, about which green flashes scintillated, and 

out of the funnel of this there smoked the Heat-Ray. 
In a few minutes there was, so far as the soldier could 
see, not a living thing left upon the common, and every 

bush and tree upon it that was not already a blackened 

skeleton was burning. The hussars
 had been on the road 
beyond the curvature of the ground, and he saw nothing 

of them. He heard the Martians
 rattle for a time and then 
become still. The giant saved Woking station and its 

cluster of houses until the last; then in 
a moment the Heat-
Ray was brought to bear, and the town became a heap of 

fiery ruins. Then the Thing shut off the Heat-Ray, and 

turning its back upon the artill
ery- man, began to waddle 
away towards the smouldering pine woods that sheltered 

the second cylinder. As it di
d so a second glittering Titan 
built itself up out of the pit. 
The second monster followed the first, and at that the 
artilleryman began to crawl ve
ry cautiously across the hot 
heather ash towards Horsell. He managed to get alive into 

the ditch by the side of the road, and so escaped to 
Woking. There his story became ejaculatory. The place 
was impassable. It seems there were a few people alive 
The War of the Worlds  
82 of 293 there, frantic for the most part and many burned and 
scalded. He was turned aside by the fire, and hid among 

some almost scorching heaps of
 broken wall as one of the 
Martian giants returned. He 
saw this one pursue a man, 
catch him up in one of its steely tentacles, and knock his 

head against the trunk of a 
pine tree. At last, after 
nightfall, the artilleryman made a rush for it and got over 

the railway embankment. 
Since then he had been skulking along towards 
Maybury, in the hope of getting out of danger 

Londonward. People were hiding 
in trenches and cellars, 
and many of the survivors had made off towards Woking 

village and Send. He had been consumed with thirst until 

he found one of the water mains near the railway arch 

smashed, and the water bubbling out like a spring upon 

the road. That was the story I got from
 him, bit by bit. He grew 
calmer telling me and trying to make me see the things he 

had seen. He had eaten no food since midday, he told me 

early in his narrativ
e, and I found some
 mutton and bread 
in the pantry and brought it into the room. We lit no lamp 

for fear of attracting the Mart
ians, and ever and again our 
hands would touch upon bread or meat. As he talked, 
things about us came darkly 
out of the dar
kness, and the 
The War of the Worlds  
83 of 293 trampled bushes and broken rose trees outside the window 
grew distinct. It would seem
 that a number of men or 
animals had rushed across the lawn. I began to see his 

face, blackened and haggard, as no doubt mine was also. 
When we had finished eating we went softly upstairs to 
my study, and I looked again 
out of the open window. In 
one night the valley had beco
me a valley of ashes. The 
fires had dwindled now. Where flames had been there 

were now streamers of smoke; 
but the countless ruins of 
shattered and gutted houses 
and blasted and blackened 
trees that the night had hi
dden stood out now gaunt and 
terrible in the pitiless light 
of dawn. Yet here and there 
some object had had the luck to escapea white railway 

signal here, the end of a gree
nhouse there, white and fresh 
amid the wreckage. Never before in the history of warfare 

had destruction been so indi
scriminate and so universal. 
And shining with the growing 
light of the east, three of 
the metallic giants stood about 
the pit, their cowls rotating 
as though they were surveying the desolation they had 

made. 
It seemed to me that the 
pit had been enlarged, and 
ever and again puffs of vivi
d green vapour streamed up 
and out of it towards the 
brightening dawnstreamed up, 
whirled, broke, and vanished. The War of the Worlds  
84 of 293 Beyond were the pillars of fire about Chobham. They 
became pillars of bloodshot smoke at the first touch of 

day. The War of the Worlds  
85 of 293 CHAPTER TWELVE 
 WHAT I SAW OF THE DESTRUCTION OF 
WEYBRIDGE AND SHEPPERTON 
As the dawn grew brighter we withdrew from the 
window from which we had watched the Martians, and 

went very quietly downstairs. The artilleryman ag
reed with me that the house was no 
place to stay in. He propose
d, he said, to make his way 
Londonward, and thence rejoin his batteryNo. 12, of 

the Horse Artillery. My plan was to return at once to 

Leather- head; and so greatly
 had the strength of the 
Martians impressed me that I had determined to take my 

wife to New- haven, and go w
ith her out of the country 
forthwith. For I already percei
ved clearly that the country 
about London must inevitably be
 the scene of a disastrous 
struggle before such creatures as these could be 

destroyed. Between us and Leatherhead, however, lay the third 
cylinder, with its guarding 
giants. Had I been alone, I 
think I should have taken my
 chance and struck across 
country. But the artilleryma
n dissuaded me: Its no 
The War of the Worlds  
86 of 293 kindness to the right sort of wi
fe, he said, to make her a 
widow"; and in the end I agreed to go with him, under 

cover of the woods, northward as far as Street Cobham 

before I parted with him. Thence I would make a big 

detour by Epsom to reach Leatherhead. 
I should have started at once, but my companion had 
been in active service and 
he knew better than that. He 
made me ransack the house for a flask, which he filled 

with whiskey; and we lined every available pocket with 

packets of biscuits and slices
 of meat. Then we crept out 
of the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the ill-

made road by which I had come overnight. The houses 

seemed deserted. In the road lay a group of three charred 

bodies close together, struck 
dead by the Heat-Ray; and 
here and there were things
 that people had droppeda 
clock, a slipper, a silver spoon, and the like poor 

valuables. At the corner turning up towards the post office 

a little cart, filled with boxes and furniture, and horseless, 

heeled over on a broken wheel. A cash box had been 

hastily smashed open and thrown under the debris. 
Except the lodge at the Orphanage, which was still on 
fire, none of the houses had suffered very greatly here. 
The Heat- Ray had shaved the chimney tops and passed. 
Yet, save our- selves, there did not seem to be a living 
The War of the Worlds  
87 of 293 soul on Maybury Hill. The majority of the inhabitants had 
escaped, I suppose, by way of
 the Old Woking roadthe 
road I had taken when I dr
ove to Leathe
rheador they 
had hidden. We went down the lane, by the body of the man in 
black, sodden now from the overn
ight hail, and broke into 
the woods at the foot of the hill. We pushed through these 

towards the railway without meeting a soul. The woods 

across the line were but the scarred and blackened ruins of 
woods; for the most part the 
trees had fallen, but a certain 
proportion still stood, dismal grey stems, with dark brown 

foliage instead of green. On our side the fire had done no more than scorch the 
nearer trees; it had failed to secure its footing. In one 

place the woodmen had been at work on Saturday; trees, 

felled and freshly trimmed, lay in a clearing, with heaps 

of sawdust by the sawing-machine and its engine. Hard by 

was a temporary hut, deserte
d. There was not a breath of 
wind this morning, and everyt
hing was strangely still. 
Even the birds were hushed, and as we hurried along I and 
the artilleryman talked in 
whispers and looked now and 
again over our shoulders. On
ce or twice we stopped to 
listen. The War of the Worlds  
88 of 293 After a time we drew near the road, and as we did so 
we heard the clatter of hoof
s and saw through the tree 
stems three cavalry soldiers riding slowly towards 

Woking. We hailed them, and they halted while we 

hurried towards them. It was a lieutenant and a couple of 

privates of the 8th Hussars, with a stand like a theodolite, 

which the artilleryman told me was a heliograph. 
You are the first men Ive seen coming this way this 
morning, said the lieutenant. Whats brewing? 
His voice and face were eager. The men behind him 
stared curiously. The artille
ryman jumped down the bank 
into the road and saluted. 
Gun destroyed last night, 
sir. Have been hiding. 
Trying to rejoin battery, sir. 
Youll come in sight of the 
Martians, I expect, about half a mile along this road. 
What the dickens are they like? asked the lieutenant. 

Giants in armour, sir. H
undred feet high. Three legs 
and a body like luminium, with a mighty great head in a 

hood, sir. Get out! said the lieut
enant. What confounded non- 
sense! Youll see, sir. They carry a kind of box, sir, that 
shoots fire and strikes you dead. What dye meana gun? 
The War of the Worlds  
89 of 293 No, sir, and the artilleryman began a vivid account of 
the Heat-Ray. Halfway through, the lieutenant interrupted him and looked up at me. I was still standing on the bank 

by the side of the road. Its perfectly 
true, I said. Well, said the lieutenant
, I suppose its my business 
to see it too. Look hereto
 the artillerymanwere 
detailed here clearing people out of their houses. Youd 

better go along and report yourself to Brigadier-General 
Marvin, and tell him all you know. Hes at Weybridge. 

Know the way? I do, I said; and he turned his horse southward again. Half a mile, you say? said he. 

At most, I answered, a
nd pointed over the treetops 
south- ward. He thanked me and rode on, and we saw 

them no more. 
Farther along we came upon 
a group of three women 
and two children in the road, busy clearing out a 

labourers cottage. They had got hold of a little hand 

truck, and were piling it up 
with unclean-looking bundles 
and shabby furniture. They
 were all too assiduously 
engaged to talk to us as we passed. By Byfleet station we emerged from the pine trees, and 
found the country calm and peaceful under the morning 
The War of the Worlds  
90 of 293 sun- light. We were
 far beyond the range of the Heat-Ray 
there, and had it not been for the silent desertion of some 

of the houses, the stirring movement of packing in others, 

and the knot of soldiers sta
nding on the bridge over the 
railway and staring down the line towards Woking, the 

day would have seemed very like any other Sunday. 
Several farm waggons and carts were moving creakily 
along the road to Addlestone, and suddenly through the 

gate of a field we saw, across a stretch of flat meadow, six 

twelve- pounders standing n
eatly at equa
l distances pointing towards Woking. The gunners stood by the guns 

waiting, and the ammunition waggons were at a business-

like distance. The men st
ood almost as if under 
inspection. Thats good! said I. They will get one fair shot, at 
any rate. The artilleryman hesitated at the gate. 

I shall go on, he said. 
Farther on towards Weybridge
, just over the bridge, 
there were a number of men in white fatigue jackets 

throwing up a long rampart, and more guns behind. 
Its bows and arrows agai
nst the lightning, anyhow, 
said the artilleryman. They a
vent seen that fire-beam 
yet. The War of the Worlds  
91 of 293 The officers who were not 
actively engaged stood and stared over the treetops 
southwestward, and the men 
digging would stop every now a
nd again to stare in the 
same direction. 
Byfleet was in a tumult; people packing, and a score of 
hussars, some of them dismounted, some on horseback, 

were hunting them about. Three or four black government 

waggons, with crosses in white circles, and an old 

omnibus, among other vehicles, were being loaded in the 

village street. There were scores of people, most of them 

sufficiently sabbatical to have 
assumed their best clothes. 
The soldiers were having the 
greatest difficulty in making 
them realise the gravity of their position. We saw one 

shrivelled old fellow with a huge box and a score or more 

of flower pots containing or
chids, angrily expostulating 
with the corporal who woul
d leave them behind. I stopped 
and gripped his arm. 
Do you know whats over ther
e? I said, pointing at the pine tops that hid the Martians. Eh? said he, tu
rning. I was explainin these is 
vallyble. 
Death! I shouted. Death is coming! Death! and 
leaving him to digest that if
 he could, I hurried on after 
the artillery- man. At the 
corner I looked back. The 
The War of the Worlds  
92 of 293 soldier had left him, and he 
was still standing by his box, 
with the pots of orchids on 
the lid of it, and staring 
vaguely over the trees. No one in Weybridge could tell us where the 
headquarters were establishe
d; the whole place was in 
such confusion as I had neve
r seen in any town before. 
Carts, carriages every- where, the most astonishing 

miscellany of conveyances and horseflesh. The 

respectable inhabitants of 
the place, men in golf and 
boating costumes, wives pretti
ly dressed, were packing, 
river-side loafers energetica
lly helping, children excited, 
and, for the most part, highly delighted at this astonishing 

variation of their Sunday experiences. In the midst of it all 
the worthy vicar was very pluckily holding an early 

celebration, and his bell wa
s jangling out above the 
excitement. 
I and the artilleryman, seat
ed on the step of the 
drinking fountain, made a very passable meal upon what 

we had brought with us. Patr
ols of soldiershere no 
longer hussars, but grenadie
rs in whitewere warning 
people to move now or to take refuge in their cellars as 

soon as the firing began. We
 saw as we crossed the 
railway bridge that a gr
owing crowd of people had 
assembled in and about the railway station, and the 
The War of the Worlds  
93 of 293 swarming platform was piled with boxes and packages. 
The ordinary traffic had been stopped, I believe, in order 

to allow of the passage of troops and guns to Chertsey, 

and I have heard since that a savage struggle occurred for 

places in the special trains th
at were put on at a later hour. 
We remained at Weybridge until midday, and at that 
hour we found ourselves at the place near Shepperton 

Lock where the Wey and Thames join. Part of the time we 

spent helping two old women to pack a little cart. The 

Wey has a treble mouth, and at 
this point boats are to be 
hired, and there was a ferry across the river. On the 

Shepperton side was an inn with a lawn, and beyond that 

the tower of Shepperton Church it has been replaced by 

a spirerose above the trees. Here we found an excite
d and noisy crowd of 
fugitives. As yet the flight had not grown to a panic, but 

there were already far more
 people than all the boats 
going to and fro could enable to cross. People came 

panting along under heavy bur- dens; one husband and 

wife were even carrying a small out- house door between 

them, with some of their household goods piled thereon. 

One man told us he meant to try to get away from 
Shepperton station. The War of the Worlds  
94 of 293 There was a lot of shouting, and one man was even 
jesting. The idea people seemed 
to have here was that the 
Martians were simply formidable human beings, who 

might attack and sack the town, to be certainly destroyed 

in the end. Every now and then people would glance 

nervously across the Wey, 
at the meadows towards 
Chertsey, but everything over there was still. 
Across the Thames, except just where the boats landed, 
everything was quiet, in vivi
d contrast with the Surrey 
side. The people who landed there from the boats went 
tramping off down the lane. The big ferryboat had just 

made a journey. Three or four soldiers stood on the lawn 

of the inn, staring and jesti
ng at the fugitives, without 
offering to help. The inn was cl
osed, as it was now within 
prohibited hours. Whats that? cried a boatman, and Shut up, you 
fool! said a man near me 
to a yelping dog. Then the 
sound came again, this time from the direction of 

Chertsey, a muffled thudthe sound of a gun. The fighting was beginning. Almost immediately 
unseen batteries across the ri
ver to our right, unseen 
because of the trees, took up the chorus, firing heavily one 
after the other. A woman screamed. Everyone stood 
arrested by the sudden stir of battle, near us and yet 
The War of the Worlds  
95 of 293 invisible to us. Nothing was to be seen save flat meadows, 
cows feeding unconcernedly for 
the most part, and silvery 
pollard willows motionless 
in the warm sunlight. 
The sojersll stop em, 
said a woman beside me, 
doubt- fully. A haziness rose over the treetops. Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the 
river, a puff of smoke that je
rked up into the air and hung; 
and forthwith the ground heaved under foot and a heavy 

explosion shook the air, sm
ashing two or three windows 
in the houses near, and leaving us astonished. Here they are! shouted a man in a blue jersey. 
Yonder! Dyer see them? Yonder! 
Quickly, one after the other, one, two, three, four of the armoured Martians appeared, far away over the little 

trees, across the flat mead
ows that stretched towards 
Chertsey, and striding hurriedly towards the river. Little 
cowled figures they seemed at first, going with a rolling 

motion and as fast as flying birds. Then, advancing obliquely 
towards us, came a fifth. 
Their armoured bodies glittere
d in the sun as they swept 
swiftly forward upon the guns, growing rapidly larger as 

they drew nearer. One on the extreme left, the remotest 
that is, flourished a huge case high in the air, and the 
The War of the Worlds  
96 of 293 ghostly, terrible Heat-Ray I 
had already seen on Friday 
night smote towards Chertsey, and struck the town. 
At sight of these strange, sw
ift, and terrible creatures 
the crowd near the waters edge seemed to me to be for a 

moment horror-struck. There was no screaming or 

shouting, but a silence. Then a hoarse murmur and a 

movement of feeta splash
ing from the water. A man, 
too frightened to drop the portmanteau he carried on his 

shoulder, swung round and sent me staggering with a 

blow from the corner of his burden. A woman thrust at me 

with her hand and rushed past 
me. I turned with the rush 
of the people, but I was not 
too terrified for thought. The 
terrible Heat-Ray was in 
my mind. To get under water! 
That was it! Get under water! I shouted, unheeded. 
I faced about again, and rushed towards the 
approaching Martian, rushed
 right down the gravelly 
beach and headlong into the water. Others did the same. A 

boatload of people putting back came leaping out as I 

rushed past. The stones under my feet were muddy and 

slippery, and the river was so low that I ran perhaps 

twenty feet scarcely waist-deep. Then, as the Martian 
towered overhead scarcely a couple of hundred yards 
away, I flung myself forward under the surface. The 
The War of the Worlds  
97 of 293 splashes of the people in the boats leaping into the river 
sounded like thunderclaps in my ears. People were 

landing hastily on both sides of
 the river. But the Martian 
machine took no more notice for the moment of the 

people running this way and that than a man would of the 

confusion of ants in a nest
 against which his foot has 
kicked. When, half suffocated, I raised my head above 

water, the Martians hood point
ed at the batteries that 
were still firing across the ri
ver, and as it advanced it 
swung loose what must have been the generator of the 

Heat-Ray. In another moment it was on 
the bank, and in a stride 
wading halfway across. The kn
ees of its foremost legs 
bent at the farther bank, a
nd in another moment it had 
raised itself to its full height again, close to the village of 

Shepperton. Forthwith the 
six guns which, unknown to anyone on the right bank, ha
d been hidden behind the 
outskirts of that village, fired simultaneously. The sudden 

near concussion, the last clos
e upon the first, made my 
heart jump. The monster was already raising the case 

generating the Heat-Ray as the first shell burst six yards 

above the hood. I gave a cry of astonishment. I saw and thought 
nothing of the other four Mart
ian monsters; my attention 
The War of the Worlds  
98 of 293 was riveted upon the nearer in
cident. Simultaneously two 
other shells burst in the 
air near the body as the hood 
twisted round in time to rece
ive, but not in time to dodge, 
the fourth shell. 
The shell burst clean in th
e face of the Thing. The 
hood bulged, flashed, was whirled off in a dozen tattered 

fragments of red flesh and glittering metal. 
Hit! shouted I, w
ith something between a scream and 
a cheer. I heard answering shouts fr
om the people in the water 
about me. I could have leaped 
out of the wate
r with that 
momentary exultation. 
The decapitated colossus reeled like a drunken giant; 
but it did not fall over. It
 recovered its balance by a 
miracle, and, no longer heedi
ng its steps and with the 
camera that fired the Heat
-Ray now rigidly upheld, it 
reeled swiftly upon Shepperton.
 The living intelligence, 
the Martian within the hood, was slain and splashed to the 

four winds of heaven, and th
e Thing was now but a mere 
intricate device of metal whirling to destruction. It drove 

along in a straight lin
e, incapable of gui
dance. It struck 
the tower of Shepperton Church, smashing it down as the 
impact of a battering ra
m might have done, swerved 
The War of the Worlds  
99 of 293 aside, blundered on and collapsed with tremendous force 
into the river out of my sight. 
A violent explosion shook the air, and a spout of water, steam, mud, and shattered metal shot far up into the sky. 

As the camera of the Heat-Ray 
hit the water, the latter had 
immediately flashed into st
eam. In another moment a 
huge wave, like a muddy tidal 
bore but almost scaldingly 
hot, came sweeping round the bend upstream. I saw 

people struggling shorewards, and heard their screaming 
and shouting faintly above th
e seething and roar of the 
Martians collapse. 
For a moment I heeded nothing of the heat, forgot the 
patent need of self-preservation. I splashed through the 

tumultuous water, pushing aside a man in black to do so, 

until I could see round the bend. Half a dozen deserted 

boats pitched aimlessly upon th
e confusion of the waves. 
The fallen Martian came into sight downstream, lying 

across the river, and for the most part submerged. 
Thick clouds of steam were
 pouring off the wreckage, 
and through the tumultuously 
whirling wisps I could see, intermittently and vaguely, the gigantic limbs churning 

the water and flinging a splash and spray of mud and froth 
into the air. The tentacles swayed and struck like living 
arms, and, save for the helpless purposelessness of these 
The War of the Worlds  
100 of 293 movements, it was as if some wounded thing were 
struggling for its life amid the waves. Enormous 

quantities of a ruddy-brown fluid were spurting up in 

noisy jets out of the machine. 
My attention was diverted from this death flurry by a 
furious yelling, like that of the thing called a siren in our 

manufacturing towns. A man, knee-deep near the towing 

path, shouted inaudibly to me and pointed. Looking back, 

I saw the other Martians advancing with gigantic strides 

down the riverbank from the direction of Chertsey. The 

Shepperton guns spoke this time unavailingly. 
At that I ducked at once
 under water, and, holding my 
breath until movement was an agony, blundered painfully 

ahead under the surface as long as I could. The water was 

in a tumult about me, and rapidly growing hotter. 
When for a moment I raised my head to take breath 
and throw the hair and water from my eyes, the steam was 

rising in a whirling white fog that at first hid the Martians 

altogether. The noise was deafening. Then I saw them 

dimly, colossal figures of grey, magnified by the mist. 

They had passed by me, and two were stooping over the 

frothing, tumultuous ruins of their comrade. 
The third and fourth stood beside him in the water, one 
perhaps two hundred yards from me, the other towards 
The War of the Worlds  
101 of 293 Laleham. The generators of
 the Heat-Rays waved high, 
and the hissing beams smote down this way and that. 
The air was full of sound, a deafening and confusing 
conflict of noisesthe clangorous din of the Martians, the crash of falling houses, the thud of trees, fences, sheds 

flashing into flame, and the 
crackling and roaring of fire. 
Dense black smoke was leaping up to mingle with the 

steam from the river, and as 
the Heat-Ray went to and fro 
over Weybridge its impact was marked by flashes of 

incandescent white, that gave
 place at once to a smoky 
dance of lurid flames. The near
er houses still stood intact, 
awaiting their fate, shadowy, fa
int and pallid in the steam, 
with the fire behind them going to and fro. For a moment perhaps I stood 
there, breast-high in the 
almost boiling water, dumbfounded at my position, 

hopeless of escape. Through the reek I could see the 

people who had been with me in the river scrambling out 

of the water through the reed
s, like little frogs hurrying 
through grass from the advan
ce of a man, or running to 
and fro in utter dismay on the towing path. 
Then suddenly the white flashes of the Heat-Ray came 
leaping towards me. The hous
es caved in as they 
dissolved at its touch, and da
rted out flames; the trees 
changed to fire with a roar. The Ray flickered up and 
The War of the Worlds  
102 of 293 down the towing path, licking off the people who ran this way and that, and came down to the waters edge not fifty 

yards from where I stood. It
 swept across the river to 
Shepperton, and the water in its track rose in a boiling 

weal crested with steam. I turned shoreward. 
In another moment the huge
 wave, well-nigh at the 
boiling- point had rushed upon me. I screamed aloud, and 

scalded, half blinded, agonised, I staggered through the 

leaping, hissing water toward
s the shore. Had my foot 
stumbled, it would have been 
the end. I fell helplessly, in 
full sight of the Martians, 
upon the broad, bare gravelly 
spit that runs down to mark
 the angle of the Wey and 
Thames. I expected nothing but death. 
I have a dim memory of th
e foot of a Martian coming 
down within a score of yards of
 my head, driving straight 
into the loose gravel, whirling it this way and that and 

lifting again; of a long suspense, and then of the four 

carrying the debris of their comrade between them, now 

clear and then presently faint through a veil of smoke, 

receding interminably, as it seemed to me, across a vast 

space of river and meadow. And then, very slowly, I 

realised that by a miracle I had escaped. 
The War of the Worlds  
103 of 293 CHAPTER THIRTEEN  HOW I FELL IN WITH THE CURATE After getting this sudden lesson in the power of 
terrestrial weapons, the Martians retreated to their original 
position upon Horsell Common; 
and in their haste, and 
encumbered with the debris of their smashed companion, 

they no doubt overlooked many such a stray and 

negligible victim as myself. Had they left their comrade 

and pushed on forthwith, there was nothing at that time 
between them and London but
 batteries of twelve-
pounder guns, and they would certainly have reached the 

capital in advance of the tidings of their approach; as 

sudden, dreadful, and destructive their advent would have 

been as the earthquake that 
destroyed Lisbon a century 
ago. But they were in no hurry. Cylinder followed cylinder 
on its interplanetary fli
ght; every twenty-four hours 
brought them reinforcement. 
And meanwhile the military 
and naval authorities, now fu
lly alive to the tremendous 
power of their antagonists, wo
rked with furious energy. 
Every minute a fresh gun came into position until, before 
The War of the Worlds  
104 of 293 twilight, every copse, every row of suburban villas on the 
hilly slopes about Kingston 
and Richmond, masked an 
expectant black muzzle. And through the charred and 

desolated areaperhaps twenty square miles altogether

that encircled the Martian encampment on Horsell 

Common, through charred and ruined villages among the 
green trees, through the blackened and smoking arcades 

that had been but a day ago pine spinneys, crawled the 

devoted scouts with the heliographs that were presently to 

warn the gunners of the Martian approach. But the 

Martians now understood our
 command of artillery and 
the danger of human proximit
y, and not a man ventured 
within a mile of either cylinde
r, save at the price of his 
life. 
It would seem that these gian
ts spent the earlier part of 
the afternoon in going to a
nd fro, transferring everything from the second and third cylindersthe second in 

Addle- stone Golf Links and 
the third at Pyrfordto their 
original pit on Horsell Co
mmon. Over that, above the 
blackened heather and ruined 
buildings that stretched far 
and wide, stood one as sentinel, while the rest abandoned 

their vast fighting-machines and descended into the pit. 
They were hard at work there far into the night, and the 
towering pillar of dense green smoke that rose therefrom 
The War of the Worlds  
105 of 293 could be seen from the hills about Merrow, and even, it is 
said, from Banstead and Epsom Downs. 
And while the Martians behind me were thus preparing 
for their next sally, and in fr
ont of me Humanity gathered 
for the battle, I made my wa
y with infinite pains and 
labour from the fire and smoke of burning Weybridge 

towards London. I saw an abandoned boat, very small and remote, 
drifting down-stream; and throwing off the most of my 

sodden clothes, I went after it
, gained it, and so escaped 
out of that destruction. There 
were no oars in the boat, but 
I contrived to paddle, as well as my parboiled hands 

would allow, down the rive
r towards Halliford and Walton, going very tediously and continually looking 

behind me, as you may well under- stand. I followed the 

river, because I considered that the water gave me my 

best chance of escape should these giants return. 
The hot water from the Martians overthrow drifted 
down- stream with me, so that 
for the best part of a mile I 
could see little of either 
bank. Once, however, I made out 
a string of black figures 
hurrying across the meadows 
from the direction of Weybridge. Halliford, it seemed, 
was deserted, and several of 
the houses facing the river 
were on fire. It was strange to
 see the place 
quite tranquil, 
The War of the Worlds  
106 of 293 quite desolate under the hot bl
ue sky, with the smoke and 
little threads of flame going stra
ight up into the heat of the 
afternoon. Never before ha
d I seen houses burning 
without the accompaniment of an obstructive crowd. A 

little farther on the dry reed
s up the bank were smoking 
and glowing, and a line of 
fire inland was marching 
steadily across a la
te field of hay. For a long time I drifted, so painful and weary was I 
after the violence I had been 
through, and so intense the 
heat upon the water. Then my
 fears got the better of me 
again, and I resumed my paddling. The sun scorched my 

bare back. At last, as the bridge at Walton was coming 

into sight round the bend, my fever and faintness 

overcame my fears, and I landed on the Middlesex bank 

and lay down, deadly sick, am
id the long grass. I suppose 
the time was then about four
 or five oclock. I got up 
presently, walked perhaps half a mile with- out meeting a 

soul, and then lay down again 
in the shadow of a hedge. I 
seem to remember talking, wanderingly, to myself during 

that last spurt. I was also very thirsty, and bitterly 

regretful I had drunk no more water. It is a curious thing 

that I felt angry with my wife; I cannot account for it, but 
my impotent desire to reach Leatherhead worried me 
excessively. 
The War of the Worlds  
107 of 293 I do not clearly remember the 
arrival of the curate, so 
that probably I dozed. I became 
aware of him as a seated 
figure in soot-smudged shir
t sleeves, and with his 
upturned, clean- shaven face st
aring at a faint flickering 
that danced over the sky. The sky was what is called a 

mackerel skyrows and rows of faint down-plumes of 

cloud, just tinted with the midsummer sunset. 
I sat up, and at the rustle of my motion he looked at me 
quickly. Have you any water? I asked abruptly. 
He shook his head. 
You have been asking for wa
ter for the last hour, he 
said. For a moment we were sile
nt, taking stock of each 
other. I dare say he found 
me a strange enough figure, 
naked, save for my water-so
aked trousers and socks, 
scalded, and my face and shoulders blackened by the 

smoke. His face was a fair w
eakness, his chin retreated, 
and his hair lay in crisp, almost flaxen curls on his low 

forehead; his eyes were rather large, pale blue, and 

blankly staring. He spoke abruptly, looking vacantly away from me. 
What does it mean? he said. What do these things 
mean? 
The War of the Worlds  
108 of 293 I stared at him and made no answer. 
He extended a thin white hand and spoke in almost a 
complaining tone. 
Why are these things permitted? What sins have we 
done? The morning service was over, I was walking 
through the roads to clear my
 brain for the afternoon, and 
thenfire, earthquake, death! As if it were Sodom and 

Gomorrah! All our work undone, all the work What 

are these Martians? 
What are we? I answer
ed, clearing my throat. He gripped his knees and turned to look at me again. 
For half a minute, perhaps, he stared silently. I was walking through the road
s to clear my brain, he 
said. And suddenlyfire, earthquake, death! He relapsed into silence, with his chin now sunken 
almost to his knees. 
Presently he began waving his hand. 
All the workall the Sunday schools What have 
we donewhat has Weybridge done? Everything gone

every- thing destroyed. The 
church! We rebuilt it only 
three years ago. Gone! Swept out of existence! Why? 
Another pause, and he 
broke out ag
ain like one demented. 
The War of the Worlds  
109 of 293 The smoke of her burning goeth up for ever and ever! 
he shouted. His eyes flamed, and he pointed a lean finger in the 
direction of Weybridge. By this time I was beginning to take his measure. The 
tremendous tragedy in whic
h he had been involvedit 
was evident he was a fugitive from Weybridgehad 

driven him to the very verge of his reason. 
Are we far from Sunbury? 
I said, in a matter-of-fact 
tone. What are we to do? he asked. Are these creatures 
every- where? Has the earth been given over to them? 
Are we far from Sunbury? 

Only this morning I offici
ated at early celebration
 Things have changed, I said, quietly. You must keep 
your head. There is still hope. 
Hope! 
Yes. Plentiful hopefor all this destruction! 
I began to explain my view of our position. He listened 
at first, but as I went on the interest dawning in his eyes 

gave place to their former st
are, and his regard wandered 
from me. 
The War of the Worlds  
110 of 293 This must be the beginning of the end, he said, 
interrupting me. The end! Th
e great and terrible day of 
the Lord! When men shall 
call upon the mountains and 
the rocks to fall upon them and hide themhide them 

from the face of Him that sitteth upon the throne! 
I began to understand th
e position. I ceased my 
laboured reasoning, struggled 
to my feet, and, standing 
over him, laid my hand on his shoulder. 
Be a man! said I. You ar
e scared out of your wits! 
What good is religion if it
 collapses under calamity? 
Think of what earthqua
kes and floods, wars and 
volcanoes, have done before to men! Did you think God 

had exempted Weybridge? He is
 not an insurance agent. 
For a time he sat in blank silence. 

But how can we escape? he asked, suddenly. They 
are invulnerable, they are pitiless. 
Neither the one nor, perhaps, the other, I answered. 
And the mightier they are the 
more sane and wary should 
we be. One of them was 
killed yonder not three hours 
ago. Killed! he said, staring a
bout him. How can Gods 
ministers be killed? 
The War of the Worlds  
111 of 293 I saw it happen. I proceeded
 to tell him. We have 
chanced to come in for the thick of it, said I, and that is 

all. 
What is that flicker in the sky? he asked abruptly. 

I told him it was the heli
ograph signallingthat it was the sign of human help and effort in the sky. 
We are in the midst of it, I 
said, quiet as it is. That 
flicker in the sky te
lls of the gathering storm. Yonder, I 
take it are the Martians, 
and Londonward, where those hills rise about Richmond and Kingston and the trees give 

cover, earth- works are being thrown up and guns are 

being placed. Presently the Martians will be coming this 

way again. And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped 
me by a gesture. 
Listen! he said. 

From beyond the low hills across the water came the 
dull resonance of distant guns and a remote weird crying. 

Then everything was still. A cockchafer came droning 

over the hedge and past us. High in the west the crescent 

moon hung faint and pale above
 the smoke of Weybridge 
and Shepperton and the hot, still splendour of the sunset. We had better follow this path, I said, northward. 
The War of the Worlds  
112 of 293 CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
 IN LONDON My younger brother was in L
ondon when the Martians 
fell at Woking. He was a medical student working for an 

imminent examination, and he heard nothing of the arrival 

until Saturday morning. The 
morning papers on Saturday 
contained, in addition to lengt
hy special articles on the 
planet Mars, on life in the pl
anets, and so forth, a brief 
and vaguely worded telegram, all the more striking for its 

brevity. The Martians, alarmed by the approach of a crowd, had 
killed a number of people w
ith a quick-firing gun, so the 
story ran. The telegram c
oncluded with the words: 
Formidable as they seem to be, the Martians have not 

moved from the pit into which they have fallen, and, 

indeed, seem incapable of doi
ng so. Probably this is due 
to the relative strength of the earths gravitational energy. On that last text their leader-writer expanded very 
comfortingly. Of course all the student
s in the crammers biology 
class, to which my brother we
nt that day, were intensely 
The War of the Worlds  
113 of 293 interested, but there were
 no signs of any unusual 
excitement in the streets. The afternoon papers puffed 

scraps of news under big headlines. They had nothing to 

tell beyond the movements 
of troops about the common, 
and the burning of the pine woods between Woking and 

Weybridge, until eight. Then the ST. JAMESS 

GAZETTE, in an extra-spec
ial edition, announced the 
bare fact of the inte
rruption of telegraphic 
communication. This was thought to be due to the falling 

of burning pine trees across th
e line. Nothing more of the 
fighting was known that night, 
the night of my drive to 
Leatherhead and back. My brother felt no anxiety a
bout us, as he knew from 
the description in the papers
 that the cylinder was a good 
two miles from my house. He made up his mind to run 

down that night to me, in orde
r, as he says, to see the 
Things before they were kill
ed. He despatched a telegram, 
which never reached me, about four oclock, and spent 

the evening at a music hall. 
In London, also, on Saturday night there was a 
thunder- storm, and my brot
her reached Waterloo in a 
cab. On the platform from which the midnight train 
usually starts he learned, 
after some waiting, that an 
accident prevented trains from reaching Woking that 
The War of the Worlds  
114 of 293 night. The nature of the accident he could not ascertain; 
indeed, the railway authorities 
did not clearly know at that 
time. There was very little excitement in the station, as the 

officials, failing to realise 
that anything further than a 
breakdown between Byfleet 
and Woking junction had occurred, were running the th
eatre trains which usually 
passed through Woking round by Virginia Water or 

Guildford. They were busy making the necessary 

arrangements to alter the r
oute of the Southampton and 
Portsmouth Sunday League excursions. A nocturnal 

newspaper reporter, mistaking my brother for the traffic 

manager, to whom he bears a slight resemblance, waylaid 

and tried to interview him. Few people, excepting the 

railway officials, connect
ed the breakdown with the 
Martians. I have read, in another acc
ount of these events, that on 
Sunday morning all London was electrified by the news 

from Woking. As a matter of
 fact, there was nothing to 
justify that very extravagan
t phrase. Plenty of Londoners 
did not hear of the Martia
ns until the panic of Monday 
morning. Those who did took some time to realise all that 

the hastily worded telegr
ams in the Sunday papers 
conveyed. The majority of people in London do not read 
Sunday papers. The War of the Worlds  
115 of 293 The habit of personal securit
y, moreover, is so deeply 
fixed in the Londoners mind, a
nd startling intelligence so much a matter of course in 
the papers, that they could 
read without any personal tr
emors: About seven oclock 
last night the Martians came 
out of the cylinder, and, 
moving about under an armour of metallic shields, have 

completely wrecked Woking station with the adjacent 

houses, and massacred an entire battalion of the Cardigan 

Regiment. No details are 
known. Maxims have been 
absolutely useless against 
their armour; the field guns have been disabled by them
. Flying hussars have been 
galloping into Chertsey. The Martians appear to be 

moving slowly towards Chertsey or Windsor. Great 

anxiety prevails in West Surrey, and earthworks are being 

thrown up to check the advance Londonward. That was 

how the Sunday SUN put it, a
nd a clever and remarkably 
prompt handbook article in the REFEREE compared the 

affair to a menagerie suddenly let loose in a village. 
No one in London knew positivel
y of the nature of the 
armoured Martians, and there 
was still a fixed idea that 
these monsters must be sluggish: crawling, creeping 

painfully such expressions 
occurred in almost all the 
earlier reports. None of th
e telegrams could have been 
written by an eye- witness of
 their advance. The Sunday 
The War of the Worlds  
116 of 293 papers printed separate editions as further news came to 
hand, some even in default of 
it. But there was practically 
nothing more to tell people 
until late in
 the afternoon, 
when the authorities gave the press agencies the news in 

their possession. It was stated that the people of Walton 

and Weybridge, and all the di
strict were pouring along the 
roads Londonward, and that was all. My brother went to church at the Foundling Hospital in 
the morning, still in ignorance of what had happened on 

the previous night. There he heard allusions made to the 

invasion, and a special prayer for peace. Coming out, he 

bought a REFEREE. He became alarmed at the news in 

this, and went again to Wate
rloo station to find out if 
communication were restore
d. The omnibuses, carriages, cyclists, and innumerable pe
ople walking in their best 
clothes seemed scarcely affected by the strange 

intelligence that the news venders were disseminating. 

People were interested, or, 
if alarmed, alarmed only on 
account of the local residents. 
At the station he heard for 
the first time that the Windsor and Chertsey lines were 

now interrupted. The 
porters told him that several remark- 
able telegrams had been received in the morning from 
Byfleet and Chertsey stations, 
but that these had abruptly 
The War of the Worlds  
117 of 293 ceased. My brother could get ve
ry little precise detail out 
of them. 
Theres fighting going on 
about Weybridge was the 
extent of their information. 
The train service was now very much disorganised. 
Quite a number of people who 
had been expecting friends 
from places on the South-Western network were standing 

about the station. One grey-headed old gentleman came 

and abused the South-Western Company bitterly to my 

brother. It wants showing up, he said. One or two trains came in from Richmond, Putney, and 
Kingston, containing people who had gone out for a days 
boating and found the locks closed and a feeling of panic 

in the air. A man in a blue and white blazer addressed my 

brother, full of strange tidings. Theres hosts of people driv
ing into Kingston in traps 
and carts and things, with boxes 
of valuables and all that, 
he said. They come from 
Molesey and Weybridge and 
Walton, and they say theres b
een guns heard at Chertsey, 
heavy firing, and that mounted soldiers have told them to 

get off at once because the Martians are coming. We 

heard guns firing at Hampt
on Court station, but we 
thought it was thunder. What the dickens does it all 
mean? The Martians cant get out
 of their pit, can they? 
The War of the Worlds  
118 of 293 My brother could not tell him. 
Afterwards he found that th
e vague feeling of alarm 
had spread to the clients 
of the underground railway, and 
that the Sunday excursionists 
began to return from all 
over the South-Western lungBarnes, Wimbledon, 

Richmond Park, Kew, and so forthat unnaturally early 

hours; but not a soul had a
nything more than vague 
hearsay to tell of. Every- one connected with the terminus 

seemed ill-tempered. 
About five oclock the gath
ering crowd in the station 
was immensely excited by the opening of the line of 

communication, which is almo
st invariably closed, 
between the South- Easter
n and the South-Western 
stations, and the passage of 
carriage trucks bearing huge 
guns and carriages crammed with
 soldiers. These were the guns that were brought up fr
om Woolwich and Chatham 
to cover Kingston. There was an exchange of pleasantries: 
Youll get eaten! Were the beast-tamers! and so forth. 

A little while after that a squad of police came into the 

station and began to clear the public off the platforms, and 

my brother went out into the street again. The church bells were ringing for evensong, and a 
squad of Salvation Army lassies came singing down 
Waterloo Road. On the bridge 
a number of loafers were 
The War of the Worlds  
119 of 293 watching a curious brown scum that came drifting down 
the stream in patches. The sun was just setting, and the 

Clock Tower and the Houses of Parliament rose against 

one of the most peaceful skies 
it is possible to imagine, a 
sky of gold, barred with l
ong trans- verse stripes of 
reddish-purple cloud. There was talk of a floating body. 
One of the men there, a reservist he said he was, told my 

brother he had seen the heliograph flickering in the west. In Wellington Street my br
other met a couple of sturdy 
roughs who had just been rushed
 out of Fleet Street with 
still- wet newspapers and staring placards. Dreadful 

catastrophe! they bawled one to the other down 

Wellington Street. Fight 
ing at Weybridge! Full 
description! Repulse of th
e Martians! London in Danger! 
He had to give threepence for a copy of that paper. Then it was, and then only, that he realised something 
of the full power and terror of
 these monsters. He learned 
that they were not merely 
a handful of small sluggish 
creatures, but that they were minds swaying vast 

mechanical bodies; and that th
ey could move swiftly and 
smite with such power that even the mightiest guns could 

not stand against them. 
They were described as vast spiderlike machines, 
nearly a hundred feet high, cap
able of the speed of an 
The War of the Worlds  
120 of 293 express train, and able to shoot out a beam of intense 
heat. Masked batt
eries, chiefly of 
field guns, had been planted in the country about Horsell Common, and 

especially between 
the Woking district and London. Five 
of the machines had been seen moving towards the 

Thames, and one, by a happy ch
ance, had been destroyed. 
In the other cases the shells
 had missed, and the batteries 
had been at once a
nnihilated by the 
Heat- Rays. Heavy 
losses of soldiers were men
tioned, but the tone of the 
despatch was optimistic. 
The Martians had been repulsed; they were not 
invulnerable. They had retr
eated to their triangle of 
cylinders again, in the circ
le about Woking. Signallers 
with heliographs were pushing forward upon them from 

all sides. Guns were in rapid transit from Windsor, 

Portsmouth, Aldershot, Woolwi
ch even from the north; 
among others, long wire-guns of ninety- five tons from 

Woolwich. Altogether one hundr
ed and sixteen were in 
position or being hastily placed, chiefly covering Lon- 

don. Never before in England ha
d there been such a vast 
or rapid concentration of military material. 
Any further cylinders that 
fell, it was hoped, could be 
destroyed at once by high expl
osives, which were being 
rap- idly manufactured and 
distributed. No doubt, ran the 
The War of the Worlds  
121 of 293 report, the situation was of
 the strangest and gravest 
description, but the public 
was exhorted to avoid and 
discourage panic. No doubt th
e Martians were strange and 
terrible in the extreme, but at the outside there could not 

be more than twenty of them against our millions. 
The authorities had reason to suppose, from the size of 
the cylinders, that at the outsi
de there could not be more 
than five in each cylinderfifteen altogether. And one at 

least was disposed ofperhaps more. The public would 

be fairly warned of the approach of danger, and elaborate 

measures were being taken for the protection of the 

people in the threat
ened southwestern
 suburbs. And so, 
with reiterated assurances of the safety of London and the 

ability of the authorities to 
cope with the difficulty, this 
quasi-proclamation closed. 
This was printed in enormous type on paper so fresh 
that it was still wet, and there had been no time to add a 

word of comment. It was curiou
s, my brother said, to see 
how ruthlessly the usual cont
ents of the paper had been 
hacked and taken out to give this place. All down Wellington Street 
people could be seen 
fluttering out the pink sheets and reading, and the Strand 
was suddenly noisy with the voices of an army of hawkers 
following these pioneers. Men came scrambling off buses 
The War of the Worlds  
122 of 293 to secure copies. Certainl
y this news excited people 
intensely, whatever their previous apathy. The shutters of 

a map shop in the Strand we
re being taken down, my 
brother said, and a man in his Sunday raiment, lemon-

yellow gloves even, was visibl
e inside the window hastily 
fastening maps of Surrey to the glass. Going on along the Strand to Trafalgar Square, the 
paper in his hand, my brother saw some of the fugitives 

from West Surrey. There was a 
man with his wife and two 
boys and some articles of furniture in a cart such as 

greengrocers use. He was driving from the direction of 

Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay 

waggon with five or six resp
ectable-looking people in it, 
and some boxes and bundles. The faces of these people 

were haggard, and their enti
re appearance contrasted 
conspicuously with the Sabba
th-best appearance of the 
people on the omnibuses. People in fashionable clothing 

peeped at them out of cabs. They stopped at the Square as 

if undecided which way to take, and finally turned 

eastward along the Strand. Some way behind these came a 
man in workday clothes, riding one of those old- 

fashioned tricycles with a sm
all front wheel. He was dirty 
and white in the face. 
The War of the Worlds  
123 of 293 My brother turned down towards Victoria, and met a 
number of such people. He had a vague idea that he might 

see something of me. He no
ticed an unusual number of 
police regulating the traffic. 
Some of the refugees were 
exchanging news with the people on the omnibuses. One 

was professing to have seen
 the Martians. Boilers on 
stilts, I tell you, striding al
ong like men. Most of them 
were excited and animated by their strange experience. 
Beyond Victoria the public-
houses were doing a lively 
trade with these arrivals. At 
all the street corners groups 
of people were reading pape
rs, talking excitedly, or staring at these unusual Sunday 
visitors. They seemed to 
increase as night drew on, until at last the roads, my 

brother said, were like Epsom High Street on a Derby 

Day. My brother addressed several of these fugitives and 

got unsatisfactory answers from most. 
None of them could tell him any news of Woking 
except one man, who assured him that Woking had been 

entirely destroyed on the previous night. I come from Byfleet, he said; man on a bicycle came 
through the place in the early morning, and ran from door 

to door warning us to come away. Then came soldiers. 
We went out to look, and ther
e were clouds of smoke to 
the south nothing but sm
oke, and not a soul coming 
The War of the Worlds  
124 of 293 that way. Then we heard the guns at Chertsey, and folks 
coming from Wey- bridge. So Ive locked up my house 

and come on. 
At the time there was a strong feeling in the streets that 
the authorities were to blame for their incapacity to 

dispose of the invaders without all this inconvenience. About eight oclock a noise
 of heavy firing was 
distinctly audible all ove
r the south of London. My 
brother could not hear it for the traffic in the main 

thoroughfares, but by striki
ng through the quiet back streets to the river he was able to distinguish it quite 

plainly. He walked from Westminster to his apartments near 
Re- gents Park, about two. He
 was now very anxious on 
my account, and disturbed at the evident magnitude of the 

trouble. His mind was inclined to run, even as mine had 

run on Saturday, on military details. He thought of all 

those silent, expectant guns, of the suddenly nomadic 
countryside; he tried to imagine boilers on stilts a 

hundred feet high. There were one or two cartl
oads of refugees passing 
along Oxford Street, and several in the Marylebone Road, 
but so slowly was the news sp
reading that Regent Street 
and Port- land Place were full of their usual Sunday-night 
The War of the Worlds  
125 of 293 promenaders, albeit they ta
lked in groups, and along the 
edge of Regents Park there were as many silent couples 

walking out together under 
the scattered gas lamps as 
ever there had been. The night was warm and still, and a 

little oppressive; the s
ound of guns continued 
intermittently, and after midnight there seemed to be sheet 

lightning in the south. He read and re-read the paper, fearing the worst had 
happened to me. He was re
stless, and after supper 
prowled out again aimlessly. He 
returned and tried in vain 
to divert his attention to hi
s examination notes. He went 
to bed a little after midnight, and was awakened from 

lurid dreams in the small hours of Monday by the sound 

of door knockers, feet runni
ng in the street, distant 
drumming, and a clamour of bell
s. Red reflections danced 
on the ceiling. For a moment he lay astonished, 

wondering whether day had come
 or the world gone mad. 
Then he jumped out of bed and ran to the window. His room was an attic and as
 he thrust his head out, up 
and down the street there were a dozen echoes to the 

noise of his window sash, and heads in every kind of 

night disarray appeared. Enqui
ries were being shouted. 
They are coming! bawled a policeman, hammering at 
The War of the Worlds  
126 of 293 the door; the Martians are 
coming! and hurried to the 
next door. The sound of drumming and trumpeting came from the 
Albany Street Barracks, and every church within earshot 

was hard at work killing sleep
 with a vehement disorderly 
tocsin. There was a noise of doors opening, and window 

after window in the houses opposite flashed from 

darkness into yellow illumination. 
Up the street came galloping a closed carriage, 
bursting abruptly into noise 
at the corner, rising to a 
clattering climax under the window, and dying away 

slowly in the distance. Clos
e on the rear of this came a 
couple of cabs, the forerunners of a long procession of 

flying vehicles, going for the 
most part to Chalk Farm 
station, where the North-Western special trains were 

loading up, instead of comi
ng down the gradient into 
Euston. For a long time my brother stared out of the window in 
blank astonishment, watching the policemen hammering 

at door after door, and deliver
ing their incomprehensible 
message. Then the door behi
nd him opened, and the man 
who lodged across the landing came in, dressed only in shirt, trousers, and slippers
, his braces loose about his 
waist, his hair disord
ered from his pillow. 
The War of the Worlds  
127 of 293 What the devil is it? he as
ked. A fire? What a devil 
of a row! They both craned their 
heads out of the window, 
straining to hear what th
e policemen were shouting. 
People were com- ing out of the side streets, and standing 

in groups at the corners talking. What the devil is it all a
bout? said my brothers 
fellow lodger. My brother answered him va
guely and began to dress, 
running with each garment to the window in order to miss 

nothing of the growing excitement. And presently men 

selling unnaturally 
early newspapers 
came bawling into 
the street: 
London in danger of suffocation! The Kingston and 
Richmond defences forced! Fearful massacres in the 

Thames Valley! 
And all about himin the rooms below, in the houses 
on each side and across the road, and behind in the Park 

Terraces and in the hundred othe
r streets of that part of 
Marylebone, and the Westbourne Park district and St. 

Pancras, and westward and nor
thward in Kilburn and St. 
Johns Wood and Hampstead, and eastward in Shoreditch 
and Highbury and Haggerston and Hoxton, and, indeed, through all the vastness of 
London from Ealing to East 
The War of the Worlds  
128 of 293 Hampeople were rubbing their eyes, and opening 
windows to stare out and ask 
aimless questions, dressing 
hastily as the first breath 
of the coming storm of Fear 
blew through the streets. It
 was the dawn of the great 
panic. London, which had gone to bed on Sunday night 

oblivious and inert, was awakened, in the small hours of 

Monday morning, to a vivid sense of danger. 
Unable from his window to learn what was happening, 
my brother went down and out into the street, just as the 

sky between the parapets of the houses grew pink with the 
early dawn. The flying peopl
e on foot and in vehicles 
grew more numerous every moment. Black Smoke! he 

heard people crying, and again Black Smoke! The 

contagion of such a unanimous fear was inevitable. As my 

brother hesitated on the doo
r-step, he saw another news 
vender approaching, and got a paper forthwith. The man 

was running away with the rest
, and selling his papers for 
a shilling each as he rana grotesque mingling of profit 

and panic. And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic 
despatch of the Commander-in-Chief: 
The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds 
of a black and poisonous vapour by means of rockets. 
They have smothered our batteries, destroyed Richmond, 
The War of the Worlds  
129 of 293 Kingston, and Wimbledon, and are advancing slowly 
towards London, destroying everything on the way. It is 
impossible to stop them. There is no safety from the 

Black Smoke but in instant flight. 
That was all, but it was enough. The whole population 
of the great six-million city was stirring, slipping, 

running; presently it w
ould be pouring EN MASSE 
northward. Black Smoke! the voices cried. Fire! 

The bells of the neighbouring church made a jangling 
tumult, a cart carelessly driven smashed, amid shrieks and 

curses, against the water trough up the street. Sickly 

yellow lights went to and fro in the houses, and some of 

the passing cabs flaunted unextinguished lamps. And 

overhead the dawn was growi
ng brighter, clear and steady and calm. 
He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and 
up and down stairs behind him. His landlady came to the 

door, loosely wrapped in dr
essing gown and shawl; her husband followed ejaculating. As my brother began to realise the import of all these 
things, he turned hastily to his own room, put all his 
available moneysome ten pounds altogetherinto his 
pockets, and went out again into the streets. The War of the Worlds  
130 of 293 CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
 WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN SURREY 
It was while the curate had sat and talked so wildly to 
me under the hedge in the flat meadows near Halliford, 

and while my brother was watc
hing the fugitives stream 
over Westminster Bridge, that
 the Martians had resumed 
the offensive. So far as one can ascertain from the 

conflicting accounts that have been put forth, the majority 

of them remained busied with preparations in the Horsell 

pit until nine that night, hurrying on some operation that 

disengaged huge volumes of green smoke. But three certainly came out
 about eight oclock and, 
advancing slowly and cautiously, made their way through 

Byfleet and Pyrford towards 
Ripley and Weybridge, and 
so came in sight of the expectant batteries against the 

setting sun. These Martians did not advance in a body, but 
in a line, each perhaps a mile and a half from his nearest 
fellow. They communicated with one another by means of 
sirenlike howls, running up and down the scale from one 

note to another. The War of the Worlds  
131 of 293 It was this howling and firing 
of the guns at Ripley and 
St. Georges Hill that we had heard at Upper Halliford. 

The Ripley gunners, unseasone
d artillery volunteers who ought never to have been placed in such a position, fired 

one wild, premature, ineffectual volley, and bolted on 

horse and foot through the de
serted village, while the 
Martian, without using his Heat-Ray, walked serenely 

over their guns, stepped gingerly among them, passed in 

front of them, and so came unexpectedly upon the guns in 

Painshill Park, which he destroyed. The St. Georges Hill men, however, were better led or 
of a better mettle. Hidden by a pine wood as they were, 

they seem to have been quite unsuspected by the Martian 

nearest to them. They laid th
eir guns as deliberately as if 
they had been on parade, a
nd fired at about a thousand 
yards range. The shells flashed all round 
him, and he was seen to 
advance a few paces, stagger, and go down. Everybody 

yelled together, and the guns 
were reloaded in frantic 
haste. The overthrown Martian set up a prolonged 

ululation, and immediately 
a second glittering giant, answering him, appeared over 
the trees to the south. It 
would seem that a leg of the 
tripod had been smashed by 
one of the shells. The whole of the second volley flew 
The War of the Worlds  
132 of 293 wide of the Martian on the ground, and, simultaneously, 
both his companions brought thei
r Heat- Rays to bear on 
the battery. The ammunition blew up, the pine trees all 
about the guns flashed into 
fire, and only one or two of 
the men who were already r
unning over the crest of the 
hill escaped. 
After this it would seem 
that the three took counsel 
together and halted, and the 
scouts who were watching 
them report that they remained absolutely stationary for 

the next half hour. The Martian who had been overthrown 

crawled tediously out of his hood, a small brown figure, 

oddly suggestive from that dist
ance of a speck of blight, 
and apparently engaged in the 
repair of his support. About 
nine he had finished, for his cowl was then seen above the 

trees again. 
It was a few minutes past ni
ne that night when these 
three sentinels were joined 
by four other Martians, each 
carrying a thick black tube. A similar tube was handed to 
each of the three, and the seven proceeded to distribute 

themselves at equal distances
 along a curved line between 
St. Georges Hill, Weybridge, and the village of Send, 

southwest of Ripley. A dozen rockets sprang out of 
the hills before them so 
soon as they began to move
, and warned the waiting 
The War of the Worlds  
133 of 293 batteries about Ditton and Esher. At the same time four of 
their fighting machines, similarly armed with tubes, 

crossed the river, and two of them, black against the 

western sky, came into sight of myself and the curate as 

we hurried wearily and painfully along the road that runs 

northward out of Halliford. They moved, as it seemed to 

us, upon a cloud, for a milky mist
 covered the fields and 
rose to a third of their height. At this sight the curate cried faintly in his throat, and 
began running; but I knew it 
was no good running from a 
Martian, and I turned asid
e and crawled through dewy nettles and brambles into the broad ditch by the side of 

the road. He looked back, saw what I was doing, and 

turned to join me. 
The two halted, the nearer 
to us standing and facing 
Sun- bury, the remoter being a 
grey indistinctness towards the evening star, away towards Staines. 
The occasional howling of th
e Martians had ceased; 
they took up their positions in the huge crescent about 

their cylinders in absolute si
lence. It was a crescent with 
twelve miles between its hor
ns. Never since the devising of gun- powder was the beginning of a battle so still. To 
us and to an observer about 
Ripley it would have had 
precisely the same effectthe Martians seemed in 
The War of the Worlds  
134 of 293 solitary possession of the darkling night, lit only as it was 
by the slender moon, the star
s, the afterglow of the 
daylight, and the ruddy glare 
from St. Georges Hill and 
the woods of Painshill. But facing that crescent everywhereat Staines, 
Hounslow, Ditton, Esher, Ockham, behind hills and 

woods south of the river, 
and across the flat grass 
meadows to the north of it, wh
erever a cluster of trees or 
village houses gave suffici
ent coverthe guns were 
waiting. The signal rockets burst and rained 
their sparks through the night and vanished, 
and the spirit of all those 
watching batteries rose to
 a tense expectation. The 
Martians had but to
 advance into the line of fire, and 
instantly those motionless bl
ack forms of men, those guns 
glittering so darkly in the ear
ly night, would explode into 
a thunderous fury of battle. 
No doubt the thought that was uppermost in a thousand of those vigilant minds, even 
as it was uppermost in mine, 
was the riddlehow much th
ey understood of us. Did 
they grasp that we in our millions were organized, 

disciplined, working together? Or did they interpret our 

spurts of fire, the sudden stin
ging of our shells, our steady 
investment of their encampme
nt, as we should the furious 
unanimity of onslaught in a di
sturbed hive of bees? Did 
The War of the Worlds  
135 of 293 they dream they might exte
rminate us? (At that time no 
one knew what food they needed.) A hundred such 

questions struggled together in
 my mind as I watched that 
vast sentinel shape. And in 
the back of my mind was the 
sense of all the huge unknow
n and hidden forces 
Londonward. Had they prepar
ed pitfalls? Were the 
powder mills at Hounslow ready as a snare? Would the 

Londoners have the heart and courage to make a greater 

Moscow of their mighty province of houses? 
Then, after an interminable time, as it seemed to us, 
crouching and peering through the hedge, came a sound 
like the distant concussion of a gun. Another nearer, and 

then another. And then the Ma
rtian beside us raised his 
tube on high and discharged it, gunwise, with a heavy 

report that made the ground heave. The one towards 

Staines answered him. Th
ere was no flash, no smoke, 
simply that loaded detonation. 
I was so excited by these heavy minute-guns following 
one another that I so far for
got my personal safety and my 
scalded hands as to clamber 
up into the hedge and stare 
towards Sunbury. As I did so a second report followed, 

and a big projectile hurtled 
overhead towards Hounslow. I 
expected at least to see smoke or fire, or some such 
evidence of its work. But all 
I saw was the deep blue sky 
The War of the Worlds  
136 of 293 above, with one solitary star, and the white mist spreading 
wide and low beneath. And 
there had been no crash, no 
answering explosion. The silence was restored; the minute 
lengthened to three. What has happened? said the curate, standing up 
beside me. 
Heaven knows! said I. 

A bat flickered by and vanished. A distant tumult of 
shouting began and ceased. I looked again at the Martian, 

and saw he was now m
oving eastward along the 
riverbank, with a swift, rolling motion, 
Every moment I expected the fire of some hidden 
battery to spring upon him; 
but the evening calm was 
unbroken. The figure of the Mar
tian grew smaller as he 
receded, and presently the mist and the gathering night 

had swallowed him up. By a common impulse we 

clambered higher. Towards Sunbury was a dark 

appearance, as though a conica
l hill had suddenly come 
into being there, hiding our 
view of the farther country; 
and then, remoter across the river, over Walton, we saw 
another such summit. These hill-like forms grew lower 

and broader even as we stared. The War of the Worlds  
137 of 293 Moved by a sudden thought, I looked northward, and 
there I perceived a third of these cloudy black kopjes had 

risen. Everything had suddenly become
 very still. Far away 
to the southeast, marking the quiet, we heard the Martians 

hooting to one another, and 
then the air quivered again 
with the distant thud of their guns. But the earthly artillery made no reply. 
Now at the time we could 
not understand these things, 
but later I was to learn th
e meaning of these ominous 
kopjes that gathered in the tw
ilight. Each of the Martians, 
standing in the great cres
cent I have described, had 
discharged, by means of the 
gunlike tube he carried, a 
huge canister over whatever hill, copse, cluster of houses, 

or other possible cover for guns, chanced to be in front of 

him. Some fired only one of 
these, some twoas in the 
case of the one we had seen; th
e one at Ripley is said to 
have discharged no fewer than five at that time. These 

canisters smashed on striking the groundthey did not 

explodeand incontinently disengaged an enormous 

volume of heavy, inky vapour, coiling and pour- ing 

upward in a huge and ebony cumulus cloud, a gaseous hill 
that sank and spread itself
 slowly over the surrounding 
The War of the Worlds  
138 of 293 country. And the touch of that
 vapour, the inhaling of its 
pungent wisps, was death to all that breathes. It was heavy, this vapour, heavier than the densest 
smoke, so that, after the first tumultuous uprush and 

outflow of its impact, it 
sank down through the air and poured over the ground in a ma
nner rather liquid than 
gaseous, abandoning the hills, and streaming into the 

valleys and ditches and watercou
rses even as I have heard 
the carbonic-acid gas that pour
s from volcanic clefts is 
wont to do. And where it came upon water some chemical 

action occurred, and the surface would be instantly 

covered with a powdery scum that sank slowly and made 

way for more. The scum was absolutely insoluble, and it 

is a strange thing, seeing the in
stant effect of the gas, that 
one could drink without hurt 
the water from which it had 
been strained. The vapour did not diffuse as a true gas 

would do. It hung together in banks, flowing sluggishly 

down the slope of the land and driving reluctantly before 

the wind, and very slowly it 
combined with the mist and 
moisture of the air, and sank 
to the earth in the form of 
dust. Save that an unknown 
element giving a group of 
four lines in the blue of the spectrum is concerned, we are 
still entirely ignorant of the nature of this substance. The War of the Worlds  
139 of 293 Once the tumultuous upheaval
 of its dispersion was 
over, the black smoke clung 
so closely to the ground, 
even before its precipitation, th
at fifty feet up in the air, 
on the roofs and upper stories of high houses and on great 
trees, there was a chance of escaping its poison altogether, as was proved even that night at Street Cobham and 

Ditton. The man who escaped at the former place tells a 
wonderful story of the strangene
ss of its coiling flow, and 
how he looked down from the church spire and saw the 

houses of the village rising lik
e ghosts out of its inky 
nothingness. For a day and a half he remained there, 

weary, starving and sun-scorched, the earth under the blue 
sky and against the prospect of
 the distant hills a velvet-
black expanse, with red roof
s, green trees, and, later, 
black-veiled shrubs and gates, barns, out- houses, and 

walls, rising here and there into the sunlight. 
But that was at Street Cobham, where the black vapour 
was allowed to remain until it sank of its own accord into 

the ground. As a rule the Martia
ns, when it had served its 
purpose, cleared the air of it 
again by wading into it and 
directing a jet of steam upon it. 
This they did with the vapour
 banks near us, as we saw 
in the starlight from the wi
ndow of a deserted house at 
The War of the Worlds  
140 of 293 Upper Halliford, whither we had returned. From there we 
could see the searchlights on Richmond Hill and Kingston 

Hill going to and fro, and about eleven the windows 

rattled, and we heard the 
sound of the huge siege guns 
that had been put in position there. These continued 

intermittently for the space of a quarter of an hour, 

sending chance shots at the invisible Martians at Hampton 
and Ditton, and then the pale beams of the electric light 

vanished, and were replaced by a bright red glow. Then the fourth cylinde
r fella brilliant green 
meteoras I learned afterwards, in Bushey Park. Before 

the guns on the Richmond and Kingston line of hills 

began, there was a fitful cannonade far away in the 

southwest, due, I believe, 
to guns being fired haphazard 
before the black vapour could over- whelm the gunners. 
So, setting about it as methodically as men might 
smoke out a wasps nest, the Ma
rtians spread this strange 
stifling vapour over the Londonward country. The horns 

of the crescent slowly moved 
apart, until at last they 
formed a line from Hanwell to Coombe and Malden. All 

night through their destruc
tive tubes advanced. Never once, after the Martian at St. Georges Hill was brought 
down, did they give the arti
llery the ghost of a chance 
against them. Wherever ther
e was a possibility of guns 
The War of the Worlds  
141 of 293 being laid for them unseen, a 
fresh canister of the black 
vapour was discharged, and 
where the guns were openly 
displayed the Heat-Ray was brought to bear. By midnight the blazing tr
ees along the slopes of 
Richmond Park and the glare 
of Kingston Hill threw their 
light upon a network of black smoke, blotting out the 

whole valley of the Thames and extending as far as the 

eye could reach. And through this two Martians slowly 
waded, and turned their hissing steam jets this way and 

that. They were sparing of the Heat-Ray that night, either 
be- cause they had but a limited supply of material for its 

production or because they di
d not wish to destroy the 
country but only to crush and overawe the opposition they 

had aroused. In the latter aim they certainly succeeded. 

Sun- day night was the end of the organised opposition to 

their movements. After that
 no body of men would stand 
against them, so hopeless was the enterprise. Even the 

crews of the torpedo-boats and destroyers that had 

brought their quick- firers up the Thames refused to stop, 

mutinied, and went down again. The only offensive 

operation men ventured upon after that night was the 
preparation of mines and pitfalls, and even in that their 
energies were frantic and spasmodic. 
The War of the Worlds  
142 of 293 One has to imagine, as well
 as one may, the fate of 
those batteries towards Esher, waiting so tensely in the 

twilight. Survivors there were none. One may picture the 

orderly expectation, the officers alert and watchful, the gunners ready, the ammunition piled to hand, the limber 

gunners with their horses and waggons, the groups of 

civilian spectators standing as near as they were 

permitted, the evening stillness, the ambulances and 

hospital tents with the burned and wounded from 

Weybridge; then the dull resonance of the shots the 

Martians fired, and the clumsy projectile whirling over 

the trees and houses and smashing amid the neighbouring 

fields. One may picture, too, the sudden shifting of the 
attention, the swiftly 
spreading coils and 
bellyings of that 
blackness advancing head
long, towering heavenward, turning the twilight to a palp
able darkness, a strange and 
horrible antagonist of vapour
 striding upon its victims, 
men and horses near it seen
 dimly, running, shrieking, 
falling headlong, shouts of dismay, the guns suddenly 
abandoned, men choking and writhing on the ground, and 

the swift broadening-out of 
the opaque cone of smoke. 
And then night and extincti
on nothing but a silent mass 
of impenetrable vapour hiding its dead. 
The War of the Worlds  
143 of 293 Before dawn the black va
pour was pouring through the 
streets of Richmond, and the 
disintegrating organism of 
government was, with a last 
expiring effort, rousing the population of London to the necessity of flight. The War of the Worlds  
144 of 293 CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
 THE EXODUS FROM LONDON So you understand the roaring 
wave of fear that swept 
through the greatest city in th
e world just as Monday was 
dawningthe stream of flight 
rising swiftly to a torrent, 
lash- ing in a foaming tumult 
round the railway stations, 
banked up into a horrible str
uggle about the shipping in 
the Thames, and hurrying by every available channel 

northward and east- ward. By ten oclock the police 

organisation, and by midday even the railway 

organisations, were losing 
coherency, losing shape and efficiency, guttering, softening, running at last in that 

swift liquefaction of the social body. All the railway lines north of the Thames and the 
South- Eastern people at Ca
nnon Street had been warned 
by mid- night on Sunday, and trains were being filled. 

People were fighting savagely for standing-room in the 
carriages even at two oclock. By three, people were 
being trampled and crushed ev
en in Bishopsgate Street, a 
couple of hundred yards or mo
re from Liverpool Street 
station; revolvers were fire
d, people stabbed, and the 
The War of the Worlds  
145 of 293 policemen who had been sent to direct the traffic, 
exhausted and infuriated, were breaking the heads of the 
people they were called out to protect. And as the day advanced a
nd the engine drivers and 
stokers refused to return to London, the pressure of the 

flight drove the people in an ever-thickening multitude 

away from the stations and along the northward-running 

roads. By mid- day a Martian had been seen at Barnes, 

and a cloud of slowly sinki
ng black vapour drove along 
the Thames and across the flats of Lambeth, cutting off all 

escape over the bridges in its sluggish advance. Another 

bank drove over Ealing, and su
rrounded a little island of 
survivors on Castle Hill, alive, but unable to escape. After a fruitless struggle to get aboard a North-Western train at Chalk Farmthe engi
nes of the trains that had 
loaded in the goods yard there PLOUGHED through 

shrieking people, and a dozen 
stalwart men fought to keep 
the crowd from crushing the driver against his furnace

my brother emerged upon th
e Chalk Farm road, dodged 
across through a hurrying swarm of vehi
cles, and had the luck to be foremost in the sack of a cycle shop. The front 

tire of the machine he got was punctured in dragging it 
through the window, but he got up and off, 
notwithstanding, with no furthe
r injury than a cut wrist. 
The War of the Worlds  
146 of 293 The steep foot of Haverstock Hill was impassable owing 
to several overturned horses, and my brother struck into 

Belsize Road. So he got out of the fury of the panic, and, skirting the 
Edgware Road, reached Edgware about seven, fasting and 

wearied, but well ahead of
 the crowd. Along the road 
people were standing in the 
roadway, curious, wondering. 
He was passed by a number of cyclists, some horsemen, 

and two motor cars. A mile fr
om Edgware the rim of the 
wheel broke, and the machine be
came unridable. He left it 
by the roadside and trudged through the village. There 

were shops half opened in the main street of the place, 

and people crowded on the pavement and in the doorways 

and windows, staring astonish
ed at this extraordinary 
procession of fugitives that was beginning. He succeeded 

in getting some food at an inn. 
For a time he remained in Edgware not knowing what 
next to do. The flying people increased in number. Many 

of them, like my brother, seemed inclined to loiter in the 

place. There was no fresh news of the invaders from 

Mars. At that time the road was cr
owded, but as yet far from 
congested. Most of the fug
itives at that hour were 
mounted on cycles, but there were soon motor cars, 
The War of the Worlds  
147 of 293 hansom cabs, and carriages hurrying along, and the dust 
hung in heavy clouds along the road to St. Albans. It was perhaps a vague id
ea of making his way to 
Chelmsford, where some friends 
of his lived, that at last 
induced my brother to strike
 into a quiet lane running 
eastward. Presently he came upon 
a stile, and, crossing it, 
followed a footpath northeastwar
d. He passed near several farmhouses and some little places whose names he did not 

learn. He saw few fugitives until, in a grass lane towards 

High Barnet, he happened upon two ladies who became 

his fellow travellers. He came upon them just in time to 

save them. 
He heard their screams, and, hurrying round the corner, 
saw a couple of men struggling 
to drag them out of the 
little pony-chaise in which they
 had been driving, while a 
third with difficulty held th
e frightened ponys head. One 
of the ladies, a short woman dressed in white, was simply 

screaming; the other, a dark, 
slender figure, slashed at the 
man who gripped her arm with
 a whip she held in her 
disengaged hand. My brother immediately gras
ped the situation, shouted, and hurried towards the struggl
e. One of the men desisted 
and turned towards him, and 
my brother, realising from 
his an- tagonists face that a fight was unavoidable, and 
The War of the Worlds  
148 of 293 being an expert boxer, went into him forthwith and sent 
him down against the wheel of the chaise. 
It was no time for pugilistic chivalry and my brother 
laid him quiet with a kick, 
and gripped the collar of the 
man who pulled at the slender 
ladys arm. He heard the 
clatter of hoofs, the whip stung across his face, a third 

antagonist struck him between the eyes, and the man he 

held wrenched himself free a
nd made off down the lane in 
the direction from which he had come. 
Partly stunned, he found 
himself facing the man who 
had held the horses head, and became aware of the chaise 

receding from him down the lane, swaying from side to 

side, and with the women in it looking back. The man 

before him, a burly rough, tried to close, and he stopped 

him with a blow in the face. 
Then, realising that he was 
deserted, he dodged round a
nd made off down the lane 
after the chaise, with the sturdy man close behind him, 

and the fugitive, who had turned now, following 

remotely. 
Suddenly he stumbled and 
fell; his immediate pursuer went headlong, and he rose to his feet to find himself with 

a couple of antagonists again. He would have had little 
chance against them had not
 the slender lady very 
pluckily pulled up and returned
 to his help. It seems she 
The War of the Worlds  
149 of 293 had had a revolver all this tim
e, but it had been under the 
seat when she and her companion were attacked. She fired 
at six yards distance, narro
wly missing my brother. The 
less courageous of the r
obbers made off, and his 
companion followed him, cursing his cowardice. They 

both stopped in sight down the lane, where the third man 

lay insensible. 
Take this! said the sle
nder lady, and she gave my 
brother her revolver. Go back to the chaise, said my brother, wiping the 
blood from his split lip. 
She turned without a wordthey were both panting
and they went back to where the lady in white struggled 

to hold back the frightened pony. The robbers had evidently had enough of it. When my 
brother looked again they were retreating. Ill sit here, said my brot
her, if I may"; and he got 
upon the empty front seat. The lady looked over her 

shoulder. Give me the reins, she said, and laid the whip along 
the ponys side. In another moment a bend in the road hid 

the three men from my brothers eyes. 
So, quite unexpectedly, my brother found himself, 
panting, with a cut mouth, a bruised jaw, and bloodstained 
The War of the Worlds  
150 of 293 knuckles, driving along an 
unknown lane with these two 
women. 
He learned they were the wife and the younger sister of a surgeon living at Stanmore, who had come in the small 

hours from a dangerous case at Pinner, and heard at some 

railway station on his way of the Martian advance. He had 
hurried home, roused the womentheir servant had left 

them two days beforepacked some provisions, put his 

revolver under the seatluckily for my brotherand told 

them to drive on to Edgware, 
with the idea of getting a 
train there. He stopped behind 
to tell the ne
ighbours. He 
would overtake them, he said, at
 about half past four in 
the morning, and now it was 
nearly nine and they had 
seen nothing of him. They
 could not stop in Edgware 
because of the growing traffic through the place, and so 

they had come into this side lane. 
That was the story they told
 my brother in fragments 
when presently they stopped again, nearer to New Barnet. 

He promised to stay with them, at least until they could 

deter- mine what to do, or 
until the missing man arrived, 
and professed to be an expert shot with the revolvera 

weapon strange to himin order to give them confidence. 
They made a sort of encam
pment by the wayside, and 
the pony became happy in the hedge. He told them of his 
The War of the Worlds  
151 of 293 own escape out of London, and all that he knew of these 
Martians and their ways. The 
sun crept higher in the sky, 
and after a time their talk died out and gave place to an 

uneasy state of anticipation. Several wayfarers came 

along the lane, and of these my brother gathered such 

news as he could. Every broken answer he had deepened 

his impression of the great di
saster that had come on 
humanity, deepened his persuasion of the immediate 

necessity for prosecuting this flight. He urged the matter 

upon them. 
We have money, said the slender woman, and 
hesitated. Her eyes met my brothers, and her hesitation ended. 

So have I, said my brother. 

She explained that they had 
as much as thirty pounds 
in gold, besides a five-pound note, and suggested that 

with that they might get upon a train at St. Albans or New 

Barnet. My brother thought 
that was hopeless, seeing the 
fury of the Londoners to crowd upon the trains, and 

broached his own idea of st
riking across Essex towards Harwich and thence escaping from the country altogether. 
Mrs. Elphinstonethat was th
e name of the woman in 
whitewould listen to no r
easoning, and kept calling 
upon George"; but her sister-in-law was astonishingly The War of the Worlds  
152 of 293 quiet and deliberate, and at last agreed to my brothers 
suggestion. So, designing to 
cross the Great North Road, 
they went on towards Barnet
, my brother leading the pony 
to save it as much as possible. As the sun crept up the sky 

the day became excessively hot, and under foot a thick, 

whitish sand grew burning and blinding, so that they 

travelled only very slowly. 
The hedges were grey with 
dust. And as they advanced towards Barnet a tumultuous 

murmuring grew stronger. 
They began to meet more people. For the most part 
these were staring before 
them, murmuring indistinct 
questions, jaded, haggard, unclean. One man in evening 

dress passed them on foot, 
his eyes on the ground. They 
heard his voice, and, looki
ng back at him, saw one hand 
clutched in his hair and the 
other beating invisible things. His paroxysm of rage over, he went on his way without 

once looking back. As my brothers party went
 on towards the crossroads 
to the south of Barnet they saw a woman approaching the 

road across some fields on their left, carrying a child and 

with two other children; and then passed a man in dirty 

black, with a thick stick in one hand and a small 
portmanteau in the other. Then round the corner of the 
lane, from between the villas
 that guarded it at its 
The War of the Worlds  
153 of 293 confluence with the high road
, came a little cart drawn by 
a sweating black pony and driv
en by a sallow youth in a 
bowler hat, grey with dust. Th
ere were three girls, East 
End factory girls, and a coupl
e of little children crowded 
in the cart. 
Thisll tike us rahnd Edgw
are? asked the driver, 
wild- eyed, white-faced; and when my brother told him it 

would if he turned to the 
left, he whipped up at once 
without the formality of thanks. 
My brother noticed a pale gr
ey smoke or haze rising 
among the houses in front of them, and veiling the white 

facade of a terrace beyond the ro
ad that appeared between 
the backs of the villas. Mrs.
 Elphinstone suddenly cried 
out at a number of tongues of
 smoky red flame leaping up 
above the houses in front of
 them against the hot, blue 
sky. The tumultuous noise reso
lved itself now into the 
disorderly mingling of ma
ny voices, the gride of many 
wheels, the creaking of waggons, and the staccato of 

hoofs. The lane came round sharply not fifty yards from 

the crossroads. Good heavens! cried Mrs. El
phinstone. Wha
t is this 
you are driving us into? My brother stopped. The War of the Worlds  
154 of 293 For the main road was a bo
iling stream of people, a 
torrent of human beings rushing northward, one pressing 

on another. A great bank of dust, white and luminous in 

the blaze of the sun, made everything within twenty feet 

of the ground grey and indi
stinct and was perpetually 
renewed by the hurrying feet of a dense crowd of horses 

and of men and women on f
oot, and by the wheels of vehicles of every description. Way! my brother heard 
voices crying. Make way! 
It was like riding into the smoke of a fire to approach 
the meeting point of the lane and road; the crowd roared 

like a fire, and the dust was hot and pungent. And, indeed, 
a little way up the road a vi
lla was burning and sending rolling masses of black smoke 
across the road to add to 
the con- fusion. Two men came past them
. Then a dirty woman, 
carrying a heavy bundle and weeping. A lost retriever 
dog, with hanging tongue, ci
rcled dubiously round them, 
scared and wretched, and fled
 at my brothers threat. 
So much as they could see of the road Londonward 
between the houses to the right was a tumultuous stream 

of dirty, hurrying people, pent
 in between the villas on 
either side; the black heads, the crowded forms, grew into 
distinct- ness as they rushed towards the corner, hurried 
The War of the Worlds  
155 of 293 past, and merged their indivi
duality again in a receding 
multitude that was swallowed up at
 last in a cloud of dust. 
Go on! Go on! cried the voices. Way! Way! 
One mans hands pressed on the back of another. My 
brother stood at the ponys hea
d. Irresistibly attracted, he 
advanced slowly, pace by pace, down the lane. 
Edgware had been a scene of confusion, Chalk Farm a 
riotous tumult, but this was a whole population in 

movement. It is hard to imagine that host. It had no 

character of its own. The fi
gures poured out past the 
corner, and receded with their backs to the group in the 

lane. Along the margin cam
e those who were on foot 
threatened by the wheels, stumbling in the ditches, 

blundering into one another. The carts and carriages crowded close upon one 
another, making little way 
for those swifter and more 
impatient vehicles that darted forward every now and then 

when an opportunity showed 
itself of doing so, sending 
the people scattering against th
e fences and gates of the 
villas. Push on! was the cry. Push on! They are coming! 

In one cart stood a blind ma
n in the uniform of the 
Salvation Army, gesticulati
ng with his crooked fingers 
and bawling, Eternity! Eter
nity! His voice was hoarse 
The War of the Worlds  
156 of 293 and very loud so that my 
brother could hear him long 
after he was lost to sight in the dust. Some of the people 

who crowded in the carts whi
pped stupidly at their horses 
and quarrelled with other driv
ers; some sat motionless, 
staring at nothing with miserable eyes; some gnawed their 

hands with thirst, or lay pros
trate in the bottoms of their 
conveyances. The horses bits were covered with foam, 

their eyes bloodshot. There were cabs, carriag
es, shop cars, waggons, 
beyond counting; a mail cart, a road-cleaners cart marked 

Vestry of St. Pancras, 
a huge timber waggon crowded 
with roughs. A brewers dray rumbled by with its two 

near wheels splashed with fresh blood. Clear the way! cried th
e voices. Clear the way! 
Eter-nity! Eter-nity! cam
e echoing down the road. There were sad, haggard women tramping by, well 
dressed, with children that
 cried and stumbled, their 
dainty clothes smothered in dust, their weary faces 

smeared with tears. With 
many of these came men, 
sometimes helpful, sometimes lowering and savage. 

Fighting side by side with th
em pushed some weary street 
outcast in faded black rags, 
wide-eyed, loud-voiced, and foul-mouthed. There were sturdy workmen thrusting their 
way along, wretched, unkempt men,
 clothed like clerks or 
The War of the Worlds  
157 of 293 shopmen, struggling spasmodically; a wounded soldier 
my brother noticed, men dresse
d in the clothes of railway 
porters, one wretched creature 
in a nightshirt with a coat 
thrown over it. But varied as its composition was, certain things all 
that host had in common. There were fear and pain on 

their faces, and fear behind them. A tumult up the road, a 

quarrel for a place in a wa
ggon, sent the whole host of 
them quickening their pace; 
even a man so scared and 
broken that his knees bent unde
r him was galvanised for a 
moment into renewed activ
ity. The heat and dust had 
already been at work upon this multitude. Their skins 

were dry, their lips black and cracked. They were all 

thirsty, weary, and footsore. And amid the various cries 

one heard disputes, reproaches
, groans of weariness and 
fatigue; the voices of most of
 them were hoarse and weak. 
Through it all ran a refrain: Way! Way! The Martians are coming! 

Few stopped and came aside from that flood. The lane 
opened slantingly into the 
main road with a narrow 
opening, and had a delusive 
appearance of coming from 
the direction of London. Yet 
a kind of eddy of people 
drove into its mouth; weak
lings elbowed out of the 
stream, who for the most part 
rested but a moment before 
The War of the Worlds  
158 of 293 plunging into it again. A little way down the lane, with 
two friends bending over him, la
y a man with a bare leg, 
wrapped about with bloody ra
gs. He was a lucky man to 
have friends. A little old man, with a grey military moustache and a 
filthy black frock coat, limped out and sat down beside 

the trap, removed his boothis sock was blood-stained

shook out a pebble, and hobbled on again; and then a little 
girl of eight or nine, all alone, threw herself under the 

hedge close by my brother, weeping. 
I cant go on! I cant go on! 

My brother woke from his torpor of astonishment and 
lifted her up, speaking gently to her, and carried her to 

Miss Elphinstone. So soon as 
my brother touched her she 
became quite still, as if frightened. 
Ellen! shrieked a woman in the crowd, with tears in 
her voiceEllen! And the child suddenl
y darted away 
from my brother, crying Mother! 
They are coming, said 
a man on horseback, riding 
past along the lane. Out of the way, there! ba
wled a coachman, towering 
high; and my brother saw a closed carriage turning into 
the lane. 
The War of the Worlds  
159 of 293 The people crushed back on 
one another to avoid the 
horse. My brother pushed the 
pony and chaise back into 
the hedge, and the man drove
 by and stopped at the turn 
of the way. It was a carriage, with a pole for a pair of 

horses, but only one was in the traces. My brother saw 

dimly through the dust that two men lifted out something 

on a white stretcher and put it
 gently on the grass beneath 
the privet hedge. One of the men came running to my brother. 

Where is there any water? 
he said. He is dying fast, 
and very thirsty. It is Lord Garrick. Lord Garrick! said my brot
her; the Chief Justice? The water? he said. 
There may be a tap, said my brother, in some of the 
houses. We have no water. I dare not leave my people. 
The man pushed against the crowd towards the gate of 
the corner house. 
Go on! said the people, th
rusting at him. They are 
coming! Go on! 
Then my brothers attent
ion was distracted by a 
bearded, eagle-faced man lugging a small handbag, which 

split even as my brothers eyes rested on it and disgorged 
a mass of sovereigns that seem
ed to break up into separate coins as it struck the ground. They rolled hither and 
The War of the Worlds  
160 of 293 thither among the struggling f
eet of men and horses. The 
man stopped and looked stupid
ly at the heap, and the 
shaft of a cab struck his shoul
der and sent him reeling. He 
gave a shriek and dodged b
ack, and a cartwheel shaved 
him narrowly. 
Way! cried the men all about him. Make way! 

So soon as the cab had passed, he flung himself, with 
both hands open, upon the heap of coins, and began 

thrusting handfuls in his pocket. A horse rose close upon 

him, and in another moment
, half rising, he had been 
borne down under the horses hoofs. Stop! screamed my brot
her, and pushing a woman 
out of his way, tried to clutch the bit of the horse. Before he could get to it, 
he heard a scream under the 
wheels, and saw through the dust the rim passing over the 

poor wretchs back. The driver of the cart slashed his 

whip at my brother, who ra
n round behind the cart. The 
multitudinous shouting confused his ears. The man was 

writhing in the dust among his scattered money, unable to 

rise, for the wheel had broken his back, and his lower 

limbs lay limp and dead. My brother stood up and yelled 

at the next driver, and a man on a black horse came to his 
assistance. 
The War of the Worlds  
161 of 293 Get him out of the road,&#x2019; said he; and, 
clutching the mans collar w
ith his free hand, my brother 
lugged him sideways. But he still clutched after his 

money, and regarded my brother fiercely, hammering at 

his arm with a handful of 
gold. Go on! Go on! shouted 
angry voices behind. Way! Way! 

There was a smash as the pole of a carriage crashed 
into the cart that the man on horseback stopped. My 

brother looked up, and the man with the gold twisted his 

head round and bit the wrist that held his collar. There 

was a concussion, and the black horse came staggering 

sideways, and the carthorse pushed beside it. A hoof 
missed my brothers foot by a 
hairs breadth. He released 
his grip on the fallen man and jumped back. He saw anger 

change to terror on the face of the poor wretch on the 

ground, and in a moment he 
was hidden and my brother 
was borne backward and carried past the entrance of the 

lane, and had to fight hard in the torrent to recover it. He saw Miss Elphinstone c
overing her eyes, and a 
little child, with all a child
s want of sympathetic 
imagination, staring with dilated eyes at a dusty 
something that lay black and still, ground and crushed 
under the rolling wheels. Let us go back! he shouted, 
The War of the Worlds  
162 of 293 and began turning the pony round. We cannot cross 
thishell, he said and they went back a hundred yards 

the way they had come, until the fighting crowd was 

hidden. As they passed the be
nd in the lane my brother 
saw the face of the dying man in the ditch under the 

privet, deadly white and drawn, and shining with 

perspiration. The two women sat silent, crouching in their 

seat and shivering. Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again. Miss 
Elphinstone was white and pale
, and her sister-in-law sat weeping, too wretched even 
to call upon G
eorge. My brother was horrified and perp
lexed. So soon as they had 
retreated he realised how ur
gent and unavoidable it was to 
attempt this crossing. He turned to Miss Elphinstone, 

suddenly resolute. We must go that way, he 
said, and led the pony round again. For the second time that day this girl proved her 
quality. To force their way into
 the torrent of people, my 
brother plunged into the traffic and held back a cab horse, 

while she drove the pony across its head. A waggon 

locked wheels for a moment
 and ripped a long splinter 
from the chaise. In another moment they were caught and 
swept forward by the stream. My brother, with the 
The War of the Worlds  
163 of 293 cabmans whip marks red across his face and hands, 
scrambled into the chaise and took the reins from her. 
Point the revolver at the 
man behind, he said, giving 
it to her, if he presses us 
too hard. No!point it at his 
horse. Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right across the road. But once in the stream he seemed to 

lose volition, to become a part
 of that dusty
 rout. They 
swept through Chipping Barnet with the torrent; they 

were nearly a mile beyond the centre of the town before 

they had fought across to the opposite side of the way. It 

was din and con- fusion indesc
ribable; but in and beyond 
the town the road forks repeatedly, and this to some 

extent relieved the stress. 
They struck eastward thr
ough Hadley, and there on either side of the road, and at another place farther on they 

came upon a great multitude of people drinking at the 

stream, some fighting to come at the water. And farther 

on, from a lull near East Ba
rnet, they saw two trains 
running slowly one after th
e other without signal or ordertrains swarming with people, with men even 

among the coals behind the enginesgoing northward 
along the Great Northern Ra
ilway. My brother supposes 
they must have filled outside London, for at that time the 
The War of the Worlds  
164 of 293 furious terror of the peopl
e had rendered the central 
termini impossible. 
Near this place they halted for the rest of the afternoon, for the violence of the day ha
d already utterly exhausted all three of them. They began to suffer the beginnings of 

hunger; the night was cold, and none of them dared to 

sleep. And in the evening many people came hurrying 

along the road near- 
by their stopping pl
ace, fleeing from 
unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction 

from which my brother had come. 
The War of the Worlds  
165 of 293 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN  THE THUNDER CHILD" Had the Martians aimed only 
at destruction, they might 
on Monday have annihilated 
the entire population of 
London, as it spread itself slowly through the home 

counties. Not only along the road through Barnet, but also 

through Edgware and Waltham Abbey, and along the 

roads eastward to South- end and Shoeburyness, and 

south of the Thames to Deal and Broadstairs, poured the 

same frantic rout. If one could have hung that June 

morning in a balloon in the 
blazing blue above London 
every northward and eastward road running out of the 

tangled maze of streets would have seemed stippled black 

with the streaming fugitives
, each dot a human agony of 
terror and physical distress. I 
have set forth at length in 
the last chapter my brothers account of the road through 

Chipping Barnet, in order th
at my readers may realise 
how that swarming of black dot
s appeared to one of those 
concerned. Never before in the history of the world had 

such a mass of human beings moved and suffered 

together. The legendary hosts
 of Goths and Huns, the 
The War of the Worlds  
166 of 293 hugest armies Asia has ever seen, would have been but a 
drop in that current. And this
 was no disciplined march; it 
was a stampedea stampede gigantic and terrible

without order and without a goal, six million people 

unarmed and unprovisioned, driv
ing headlong. It was the 
beginning of the rout of civilisation, of the massacre of 

mankind. 
Directly below him the balloonist would have seen the 
network of streets far a
nd wide, houses, churches, squares, crescents, gardensalready derelictspread out 

like a huge map, and in the southward BLOTTED. Over 

Ealing, Richmond, Wimbledon, it would have seemed as 

if some monstrous pen ha
d flung ink upon the chart. Steadily, incessantly, each black splash grew and spread, 

shooting out ramifications this
 way and that, now banking 
itself against rising ground, now pouring swiftly over a 

crest into a new-found valley, 
exactly as a gout of ink 
would spread itself upon blotting paper. And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of 
the river, the glittering Mart
ians went to and fro, calmly 
and methodically spreading their poison cloud over this 

patch of country and then over that, laying it again with 
their steam jets when it had served its purpose, and taking 
possession of the conquered country. They do not seem to 
The War of the Worlds  
167 of 293 have aimed at extermination so much as at complete 
demoralisation and the destruction of any opposition. 

They exploded any stores 
of powder they came upon, cut 
every telegraph, and wrecked th
e railways here and there. 
They were ham- stringing mankind. They seemed in no 

hurry to extend the field of their operations, and did not 

come beyond the central part of London all that day. It is 

possible that a very considerable number of people in 

London stuck to their houses
 through Monday morning. 
Certain it is that many died at home suffocated by the 

Black Smoke. 
Until about midday the Pool of London was an 
astonishing scene. Steamboats
 and shipping of all sorts 
lay there, tempted by the 
enormous sums of money 
offered by fugitives, and it is said that many who swam 

out to these vessels were thrust off with boathooks and 

drowned. About one oclock in the afternoon the thinning 

remnant of a cloud of the bl
ack vapour appeared between 
the arches of Blackfriars Bri
dge. At that the Pool became 
a scene of mad confusion, fighting, and collision, and for 

some time a multitude of boats and barges jammed in the 

northern arch of the Tower Bridge, and the sailors and 
lightermen had to fight savagely against the people who 
swarmed upon them from the riverfront. People were 
The War of the Worlds  
168 of 293 actually clambering down the 
piers of the bridge from 
above. When, an hour later, a Ma
rtian appeared beyond the 
Clock Tower and waded down the river, nothing but 

wreckage floated above Limehouse. 
Of the falling of the fifth cylinder I have presently to 
tell. The sixth star fell at Wimbledon. My brother, 

keeping watch beside the women in the chaise in a 

meadow, saw the green flash of
 it far beyond the hills. On 
Tuesday the little party, sti
ll set upon getting across the sea, made its way through the swarming country towards 

Colchester. The news that 
the Martians were now in 
possession of the whole of
 London was confirmed. They 
had been seen at Highgate, 
and even, it was said, at 
Neasden. But they did not come into my brothers view 

until the morrow. 
That day the scattered multitudes began to realise the 
urgent need of provisions. 
As they grew hungry the rights 
of property ceased to be rega
rded. Farmers were out to 
defend their cattle-sheds, granaries, and ripening root 
crops with arms in their hands. A number of people now, 

like my brother, had their f
aces eastward, and there were 
some desperate souls even going back towards London to 
get food. These were chiefly people from the northern 
The War of the Worlds  
169 of 293 suburbs, whose knowledge of the Black Smoke came by 
hearsay. He heard that about
 half the members of the 
government had gathered at Birmingham, and that 

enormous quantities of hi
gh explosives were being 
prepared to be used in automatic mines across the 

Midland counties. He was also told that the Midland Railway Company 
had replaced the desertions of the first days panic, had 

resumed traffic, and was r
unning northward trains from 
St. Albans to relieve the conge
stion of the home counties. 
There was also a placard in Chipping Ongar announcing 

that large stores of flour we
re available in the northern 
towns and that within twen
ty-four hours bread would be 
distributed among the st
arving people in the 
neighbourhood. But this intelligence did not deter him 

from the plan of escape he had formed, and the three 

pressed eastward all day, and heard no more of the bread 

distribution than this promise. Nor, as a matter of fact, did 

anyone else hear more of it. 
That night fell the seventh 
star, falling upon Primrose Hill. It fell while Miss 

Elphinstone was watching, for she took that duty 

alternately with my 
brother. She saw it. On Wednesday the three fugitivesthey had passed 
the night in a field of unripe wheatreached Chelmsford, 
The War of the Worlds  
170 of 293 and there a body of the inhabitants, calling itself the 
Committee of Public S
upply, seized the pony as 
provisions, and would give not
hing in exchange for it but 
the promise of a share in it th
e next day. Here there were 
rumours of Martians at Epping, and news of the 

destruction of Waltham Abbe
y Powder Mills in a vain 
attempt to blow up one of the invaders. 
People were watching for Martians here from the 
church towers. My brother, 
very luckily for him as it 
chanced, preferred to push on at once to the coast rather 

than wait for food, although all 
three of them were very 
hungry. By mid- day they passed through Tillingham, 

which, strangely enough, seemed to be quite silent and 

deserted, save for a few furtive plunderers hunting for 

food. Near Tillingham they s
uddenly came in sight of the 
sea, and the most amazing crowd of shipping of all sorts 

that it is possible to imagine. 
For after the sailors could no longer come up the 
Thames, they came on to the Essex coast, to Harwich and 

Walton and Clacton, and afterwards to Foulness and 

Shoebury, to bring off the people. They lay in a huge 

sickle-shaped curve that vanished into mist at last towards 
the Naze. Close inshore was a multitude of fishing 
smacksEnglish, Scotch, Fren
ch, Dutch, and Swedish; The War of the Worlds  
171 of 293 steam launches from the Tham
es, yachts, electric boats; 
and beyond were ships of large burden, a multitude of 

filthy colliers, trim merchantmen, cattle ships, passenger 

boats, petroleum tanks, ocean tramps, an old white 

transport even, neat white and grey liners from 

Southampton and Hamburg; 
and along the blue coast 
across the Blackwater my brot
her could make out dimly a 
dense swarm of boats chaffering with the people on the 

beach, a swarm which also extended up the Blackwater 

almost to Maldon. 
About a couple of miles out lay an ironclad, very low 
in the water, almost, to my brothers perception, like a 

water- logged ship. This was the ram THUNDER CHILD. 

It was the only warship in sigh
t, but far away to the right 
over the smooth surface of the 
seafor that day there was 
a dead calmlay a serpent of black smoke to mark the 

next iron- clads of the Channe
l Fleet, which hovered in an 
extended line, steam up and ready for action, across the 

Thames estuary during the course of the Martian 

conquest, vigilant and yet powerless to prevent it. At the sight of the sea, Mrs.
 Elphinstone, in
 spite of the 
assurances of her si
ster-in-law, gave way to panic. She 
had never been out of England before, she would rather 
die than trust herself friendl
ess in a foreign country, and 
The War of the Worlds  
172 of 293 so forth. She seemed, poor woman, to imagine that the 
French and the Martians might prove very similar. She 

had been growing increasingl
y hysterical, fearful, and 
depressed during the two days journeyings. Her great idea was to return to Stanmo
re. Things had been always 
well and safe at Stanmore. 
They would find George at 
Stanmore. 
It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her 
down to the beach, where presently my brother succeeded 

in attracting the attenti
on of some men on a paddle 
steamer from the Thames. They sent a boat and drove a 

bargain for thirty-six pounds for the three. The steamer 

was going, these men said, to Ostend. 
It was about two oclock when my brother, having paid 
their fares at the gangway, found himself safely aboard 

the steamboat with his charge
s. There was food aboard, 
albeit at exorbitant prices, a
nd the three of them contrived 
to eat a meal on one of the seats forward. 
There were already a coupl
e of score of passengers 
aboard, some of whom had e
xpended their last money in 
securing a passage, but the captain lay off the Blackwater 

until five in the af
ternoon, picking up 
passengers until the 
seated decks were even da
ngerously crowded. He would 
probably have remained longer had it not been for the 
The War of the Worlds  
173 of 293 sound of guns that began about that hour in the south. As 
if in answer, the ironclad seaward fired a small gun and 

hoisted a string of flags. A je
t of smoke sprang out of her 
funnels. Some of the passengers were of opinion that this firing 
came from Shoeburyness, until it
 was noticed that it was 
growing louder. At the same time, far away in the 

southeast the masts and upperw
orks of three ironclads 
rose one after the other out of
 the sea, beneath clouds of 
black smoke. But my brothers 
attention speedily reverted to the distant firing in th
e south. He fancied he saw a 
column of smoke rising out 
of the distant grey haze. 
The little steamer was already flapping her way 
eastward of the big crescent of shipping, and the low 

Essex coast was growing blue and hazy, when a Martian 
appeared, small and faint in the remote distance, 

advancing along the muddy coast from the direction of 
Foulness. At that the captai
n on the bridge swore at the 
top of his voice with fear and anger at his own delay, and 

the paddles seemed infected 
with his terror. Every soul 
aboard stood at the bulwarks or on the seats of the 

steamer and stared at that distant shape, higher than the 
trees or church towers in
land, and advancing with a 
leisurely parody of a human stride. 
The War of the Worlds  
174 of 293 It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he 
stood, more amazed than terrified, watching this Titan 

advancing deliberately towards the shipping, wading farther and farther into the wa
ter as the coast fell away. 
Then, far away beyond the Crouc
h, came another, striding 
over some stunted trees, and then
 yet another, still farther 
off, wading deeply through a shiny mudflat that seemed to 

hang halfway up between sea and sky. They were all 

stalking seaward, as if to intercept the escape of the 

multitudinous vessels that were crowded between 

Foulness and the Naze. In spite of the throbbing exertions 

of the engines of the little 
paddle- boat, and the pouring 
foam that her wheels flung behind her, she receded with 

terrifying slowness from this ominous advance. 
Glancing northwestward, my brother saw the large 
crescent of shipping al
ready writhing with the 
approaching terror; one ship
 passing behind another, 
another coming round from broadside to end on, 

steamships whistling and giving off volumes of steam, 

sails being let out, launches ru
shing hither and thither. He 
was so fascinated by this and by the creeping danger away 
to the left that he had no eyes for anything seaward. And 
then a swift movement of the steamboat (she had 
suddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung him 
The War of the Worlds  
175 of 293 headlong from the seat upon 
which he was standing. 
There was a shouting all about him, a trampling of feet, 

and a cheer that seemed to be answered faintly. The 

steamboat lurched and rolled him over upon his hands. 
He sprang to his feet and 
saw to starboard, and not a 
hundred yards from their heeling, pitching boat, a vast 

iron bulk like the blade of a plough tearing through the 

water, tossing it on either side in huge waves of foam that 

leaped towards the steam
er, flinging her paddles helplessly in the air, and 
then sucking her deck down 
almost to the waterline. 
A douche of spray blinded my brother for a moment. 
When his eyes were clear again he saw the monster had 

passed and was rushing landward. Big iron upperworks 
rose out of this headlong stru
cture, and from that twin 
funnels projected and spat a 
smoking blast shot with fire. 
It was the torpedo ram, THUNDER CHILD, steaming 

headlong, coming to the rescue of the threatened shipping. 
Keeping his footing on the heaving deck by clutching 
the bulwarks, my brother 
looked past this charging 
leviathan at the Martians ag
ain, and he saw the three of 
them now close together, and 
standing so far out to sea 
that their tripod supports were 
almost entirely submerged. 
Thus sunken, and seen in remote perspective, they 
The War of the Worlds  
176 of 293 appeared far less formidable than the huge iron bulk in 
whose wake the steamer was 
pitching so helplessly. It 
would seem they were regardin
g this new antagonist with 
astonishment. To their intelligence, it may be, the giant 

was even such another as themselves. The THUNDER 

CHILD fired no gun, but simply drove full speed towards 

them. It was probably her not firing that enabled her to get 

so near the enemy as she di
d. They did not know what to 
make of her. One shell, and 
they would have sent her to 
the bottom forthwith 
with the Heat-Ray. She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she 
seemed halfway between the steamboat and the 

Martians a diminishing black bulk against the receding 

horizontal expanse of the Essex coast. Suddenly the foremost Mart
ian lowered his tube and 
discharged a canister of the black gas at the ironclad. It hit her larboard side and glanced o
ff in an inky jet that rolled 
away to seaward, an unfoldi
ng torrent of Black Smoke, 
from which the ironclad drove clear. To the watchers 

from the steamer, low in the water and with the sun in 

their eyes, it seemed as though she were already among 

the Martians. They saw the gaunt figures 
separating and rising out of 
the water as they retreated 
shoreward, and one of them 
The War of the Worlds  
177 of 293 raised the camera-like generator of the Heat-Ray. He held 
it pointing obliquely downwa
rd, and a bank of steam 
sprang from the water at its t
ouch. It must have driven 
through the iron of the ships side like a white-hot iron 

rod through paper. A flicker of flame went up through the rising steam, 
and then the Martian reeled and staggered. In another 

moment he was cut down, and a great body of water and 

steam shot high in the air.
 The guns of the THUNDER 
CHILD sounded through the reek, going off one after the 

other, and one shot splashed the water high close by the 

steamer, ricocheted towards th
e other flying ships to the 
north, and smashed a smack to matchwood. 
But no one heeded that very 
much. At the sight of the 
Martians collapse the captain on the bridge yelled 

inarticulately, and all the 
crowding passengers on the 
steamers stern shouted together. And then they yelled 

again. For, surging out be
yond the white tumult, drove 
something long and black, the flames streaming from its 

middle parts, its ventilator
s and funnels spouting fire. She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was 
intact and her engines worki
ng. She headed straight for a 
second Martian, and was within a hundred yards of him 
when the Heat-Ray came to 
bear. Then with a violent 
The War of the Worlds  
178 of 293 thud, a blinding flash, her d
ecks, her funnels, leaped 
upward. The Martian staggered with the violence of her 
explosion, and in another mo
ment the flaming wreckage, 
still driving forward with th
e impetus of its pace, had 
struck him and crumpled him up like a thing of cardboard. 

My brother shouted involuntarily. A boiling tumult of 

steam hid everything again. 
Two!, yelled the captain. 
Everyone was shouting. The whole steamer from end 
to end rang with frantic ch
eering that was taken up first 
by one and then by all in the crowding multitude of ships 

and boats that was driving out to sea. The steam hung upon the water for many minutes, 
hiding the third Martian and the coast altogether. And all 
this time the boat was paddling steadily out to sea and 

away from the fight; and wh
en at last the confusion 
cleared, the drifting bank of 
black vapour intervened, and 
nothing of the THUNDER CHILD could be made out, nor 

could the third Martian be seen. But the ironclads to 

seaward were now quite close and standing in towards 

shore past the steamboat. 
The little vessel continued to beat its way seaward, and 
the ironclads receded slowly towards the coast, which was 
hidden still by a marbled bank of vapour, part steam, part 
The War of the Worlds  
179 of 293 black gas, eddying and combin
ing in the strangest way. 
The fleet of refugees was 
scattering to the northeast; 
several smacks were sailing 
between the ironclads and the 
steamboat. After a time, and 
before they reached the 
sinking cloud bank, the warships turned northward, and 

then abruptly went about a
nd passed into the thickening 
haze of evening south- ward. The coast grew faint, and at 

last indistinguishable amid 
the low banks of clouds that 
were gathering about the sinking sun. Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset 
came the vibration of guns, and a form of black shadows 

moving. Everyone struggled to 
the rail of the steamer and 
peered into the blinding furnace of the west, but nothing 

was to be distinguished clea
rly. A mass of smoke rose 
slanting and barred the face of the sun. The steamboat 

throbbed on its way through an interminable suspense. 
The sun sank into grey clouds, the sky flushed and 
darkened, the evening star trembl
ed into sight. It was deep 
twilight when the captain cried out and pointed. My 

brother strained his eyes. Something rushed up into the 

sky out of the greynessrushed slantingly upward and 

very swiftly into the luminous
 clearness above the clouds 
in the western sky; something flat and broad, and very 
large, that swept round in a vast
 curve, grew smaller, sank 
The War of the Worlds  
180 of 293 slowly, and vanished again in
to the grey mystery of the 
night. And as it flew it rained down darkness upon the 

land. The War of the Worlds  
181 of 293 BOOK TWO  THE EARTH UNDER THE MARTIANS The War of the Worlds  
182 of 293 CHAPTER ONE 
 UNDER FOOT 
In the first book I have wandered so much from my 
own adventures to tell of th
e experiences of my brother 
that all through the la
st two chapters I a
nd the curate have 
been lurking in the empty house at Halliford whither we 

fled to escape the Black Smoke. There I will resume. We 

stopped there all Sunday night 
and all the next daythe 
day of the panicin a little is
land of daylight, cut off by 
the Black Smoke from the rest of the world. We could do 

nothing but wait in aching in
activity during
 those two 
weary days. My mind was occupied by anxiety for my wife. I 
figured her at Leatherhead, te
rrified, in danger, mourning 
me already as a dead man. I paced the rooms and cried 

aloud when I thought of how I wa
s cut off from her, of all 
that might hap- pen to her in
 my absence. My cousin I 
knew was brave enough for a
ny emergency, but he was 
not the sort of man to realise danger quickly, to rise 

promptly. What was needed now was not bravery, but 

circumspection. My only consol
ation was to believe that 
the Martians were moving London- ward and away from 
The War of the Worlds  
183 of 293 her. Such vague anxieties keep the mind sensitive and 
painful. I grew very weary and irritable with the curates 

perpetual ejaculations; I tired of the sight of his selfish 

despair. After some ineffectual remonstrance I kept away 

from him, staying in a roomevidently a childrens 

schoolroomcontaining globes, forms, and copybooks. 

When he followed me thither, I went to a box room at the 

top of the house and, in order to be alone with my aching 

miseries, locked myself in. 
We were hopelessly hemmed in by the Black Smoke 
all that day and the morning of the next. There were signs 

of people in the next house on Sunday eveninga face at 

a window and moving lights, a
nd later the slamming of a 
door. But I do not know who th
ese people were, nor what 
became of them. We saw nothing of them next day. The 

Black Smoke drifted slowly riverward all through 

Monday morning, creep- ing nearer and nearer to us, 

driving at last along the roadway outside the house that 

hid us. A Martian came across the fields about midday, laying 
the stuff with a jet of superheated steam that hissed 

against the walls, smashed all the windows it touched, and 
scalded the curates hand as he fled out of the front room. 
When at last we crept across the sodden rooms and looked 
The War of the Worlds  
184 of 293 out again, the country northwa
rd was as though a black 
snowstorm had passed over it. Looking towards the river, 

we were astonished to see an unaccountable redness 

mingling with the black of the scorched meadows. 
For a time we did not see how this change affected our 
position, save that we were 
relieved of our fear of the 
Black Smoke. But later I perceived that we were no 

longer hemmed in, that now we might get away. So soon 

as I realised that the way 
of escape was open, my dream 
of action returned. But the curate was lethargic, 

unreasonable. We are safe here, he repeated; safe here. 

I resolved to leave himw
ould that I had! Wiser now 
for the artillerymans teaching, I sought out food and 

drink. I had found oil and rags for my burns, and I also 

took a hat and a flannel shirt that I found in one of the 
bedrooms. When it was clear to him that I meant to go 

alonehad reconciled myself to going alonehe 

suddenly roused himself to come. And all being quiet 

throughout the afternoon, we started about five oclock, as I should judge, along the blackened road to Sunbury. In Sunbury, and at intervals 
along the road, were dead 
bodies lying in contorted attitudes, horses as well as men, 
overturned carts and luggage, 
all covered thickly with The War of the Worlds  
185 of 293 black dust. That pall of cinde
ry powder made me think of 
what I had read of the destru
ction of Pompeii. We got to 
Hampton Court without misadventure, our minds full of 

strange and unfamiliar appearances, and at Hampton 

Court our eyes were relieved to find a patch of green that 

had escaped the suffocating drift. We went through 

Bushey Park, with its deer going to and fro under the 

chestnuts, and some men and women hurrying in the 

distance towards Hampton, and so we came to 
Twickenham. These were the first people we saw. Away across the road the woods beyond Ham and 
Peter- sham were still afire. Twickenham was uninjured 

by either Heat-Ray or Black Smoke, and there were more 

people about here, though none could give us news. For 

the most part they were like ourselves, taking advantage 

of a lull to shift their quarte
rs. I have an impression that 
many of the houses here were
 still occupied by scared 
inhabitants, too frightened ev
en for flight. Here too the 
evidence of a hasty rout was abundant along the road. I 

remember most vividly three smashed bicycles in a heap, 

pounded into the road by the wheels of subsequent carts. 

We crossed Richmond Bridge about half past eight. We 
hurried across the exposed brid
ge, of course, but I noticed 
floating down the stream a nu
mber of red masses, some 
The War of the Worlds  
186 of 293 many feet across. I did not know what these werethere 
was no time for scrutinyand I put a more horrible 

interpretation on them than they deserved. Here again on 

the Surrey side were black dust that had once been smoke, 

and dead bodiesa heap near the approach to the station; 

but we had no glimpse of the Martians until we were 

some way towards Barnes. 
We saw in the blackened distance a group of three 
people running down a side stre
et towards the river, but 
otherwise it seemed deserted. Up the hill Richmond town 

was burning briskly; outside 
the town of Richmond there 
was no trace of the Black Smoke. 
Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a 
number of people running, 
and the upperworks of a 
Martian fighting- machine loomed in sight over the 

housetops, not a hundred yards away from us. We stood 

aghast at our danger, and 
had the Martian looked down 
we must immediately have peri
shed. We were so terrified 
that we dared not go on, but turned aside and hid in a shed 
in a garden. There the curate crouched, weeping silently, 

and refusing to stir again. But my fixed idea of reaching Leatherhead would not 
let me rest, and in the twilight
 I ventured out again. I went 
through a shrubbery, and along a passage beside a big 
The War of the Worlds  
187 of 293 house standing in its own grounds, and so emerged upon 
the road towards Kew. The curate I left in the shed, but he 

came hurrying after me. 
That second start was the mo
st foolhardy thing I ever 
did. For it was manifest the 
Martians were about us. No 
sooner had the curate overtaken me than we saw either the 

fighting- machine we had seen before or another, far away 

across the meadows in the di
rection of Kew Lodge. Four 
or five little black figures hurried before it across the 

green-grey of the field, and in a moment it was evident 

this Martian pursued them. In three strides he was among 

them, and they ran radiating from his feet in all directions. 

He used no Heat-Ray to dest
roy them, but picked them up 
one by one. Apparently he tossed them into the great 

metallic carrier which projected behind him, much as a 

workmans basket hangs over his shoulder. 
It was the first time I realised that the Martians might 
have any other purpose than 
destruction with defeated 
humanity. We stood for a moment petrified, then turned 

and fled through a gate behi
nd us into a walled garden, 
fell into, rather than found, a fortunate ditch, and lay 

there, scarce daring to whispe
r to each other until the stars 
were out. The War of the Worlds  
188 of 293 I suppose it was nearly el
even oclock before we 
gathered courage to start again, no longer venturing into 

the road, but sneaking along hedgerows and through 

plantations, and watching keen
ly through the darkness, he 
on the right and I on the left, for the Martians, who 
seemed to be all about us. In one place we blundered upon 

a scorched and blackened area, now cooling and ashen, 

and a number of scattered dead bodies of men, burned 

horribly about the heads and trunks but with their legs and 
boots mostly intact; and of dead horses, fifty feet, 

perhaps, behind a line of f
our ripped guns and smashed 
gun carriages. Sheen, it seemed, had escaped destruction, but the 
place was silent and deserted. Here we happened on no 

dead, though the night was too dark for us to see into the 
side roads of the place. In Sheen my companion suddenly 

complained of faintness and thirst, and we decided to try 

one of the houses. The first house we entered, after a little difficulty with 
the window, was a small semi-detached villa, and I found 

nothing eatable left in the pl
ace but some mouldy cheese. 
There was, however, water to 
drink; and I took a hatchet, 
which promised to be useful in our next house- breaking. 
The War of the Worlds  
189 of 293 We then crossed to a place where the road turns 
towards Mortlake. Here there stood a white house within 

a walled garden, and in the pantry of this domicile we 

found a store of foodtwo loav
es of bread in a pan, an 
uncooked steak, and the half of a ham. I give this 

catalogue so precisely because
, as it happened, we were 
destined to subsist upon this 
store for the next fortnight. 
Bottled beer stood under a shelf, and there were two bags 

of haricot beans and some li
mp lettuces. This pantry 
opened into a kind of wash-up kitchen, and in this was 

firewood; there was also a cupboard, in which we found 

nearly a dozen of burgundy, tinned soups and salmon, and 

two tins of biscuits. We sat in the adjacent kitchen in the darkfor we 
dared not strike a lighta
nd ate bread and ham, and 
drank beer out of the same bottle. The curate, who was 

still timorous and restless,
 was now, oddly enough, for 
pushing on, and I was urging him to keep up his strength 

by eating when the thing happened that was to imprison 

us. It cant be midnight yet, 
I said, and then came a 
blinding glare of vivid green
 light. Everything in the 
kitchen leaped out, clearly vi
sible in green and black, and 
vanished again. And then follo
wed such a concussion as I 
The War of the Worlds  
190 of 293 have never heard before or since. So close on the heels of 
this as to seem instanta
neous came a thud behind me, a 
clash of glass, a crash and rattle of falling masonry all 

about us, and the plaster of the ceiling came down upon 

us, smashing into a multitude of fragments upon our 

heads. I was knocked headlong across the floor against 

the oven handle and stunned. I was insensible for a long 
time, the curate told me, and when I came to we were in 

darkness again, and he, with a face wet, as I found 

afterwards, with blood from 
a cut forehead, was dabbing 
water over me. 
For some time I could not recollect what had 
happened. Then things came to
 me slowly. A bruise on 
my temple asserted itself. 
Are you better? asked the curate in a whisper. 
At last I answered him. I sat up. 

Dont move, he said. The floor is covered with 
smashed crockery from the dresser. You cant possibly 

move without making a noise, and I fancy THEY are 

outside. We both sat quite silent, so th
at we could scarcely hear 
each other breathing. Everything seemed deadly still, but 
once something near us, some plaster or broken 
The War of the Worlds  
191 of 293 brickwork, slid down with a rumbling sound. Outside and 
very near was an intermittent, metallic rattle. 
That! said the curate, when presently it happened 
again. Yes, I said. But what is it? 
A Martian! said the curate. 

I listened again. 
It was not like the Heat-Ray, I said, and for a time I 
was inclined to think one of the great fighting-machines 

had stumbled against the house, as I had seen one stumble 

against the tower of Shepperton Church. Our situation was so strange and incomprehensible that 
for three or four hours, until 
the dawn came, we scarcely 
moved. And then the light 
filtered in, not through the 
window, which remained black, but through a triangular 

aperture between a beam and 
a heap of broken bricks in 
the wall behind us. The interior of the kitchen we now 

saw greyly for the first time. 
The window had been burst in by a mass of garden 
mould, which flowed over the table upon which we had 

been sitting and lay about our feet. Outside, the soil was 

banked high against the house. At the top of the window 
frame we could see an uproot
ed drainpipe. The floor was 
littered with smashed hardware; the end of the kitchen 
The War of the Worlds  
192 of 293 towards the house was broken into, and since the daylight shone in there, it was evident 
the greater part of the house 
had collapsed. Contrasting vividly with this ruin was the 

neat dresser, stained in the fashion, pale green, and with a 

number of copper and tin vesse
ls below it, the wallpaper 
imitating blue and white tiles,
 and a couple of coloured 
supplements fluttering from the walls above the kitchen 

range. As the dawn grew clearer, we saw through the gap in 
the wall the body of a Mart
ian, standing sentinel, I suppose, over the still glowi
ng cylinder. At 
the sight of that we crawled as circumspectly as possible out of the 

twilight of the kitchen into the darkness of the scullery. 
Abruptly the right interpretation dawned upon my 
mind. 
The fifth cylinder, I whispe
red, the fifth shot from 
Mars, has struck this hous
e and buried us under the 
ruins! For a time the curate was silent, and then he 
whispered: God have mercy upon us! 

I heard him presently whimpering to himself. 
Save for that sound we lay quite still in the scullery; I 
for my part scarce dared breat
he, and sat with my eyes 
The War of the Worlds  
193 of 293 fixed on the faint light of the 
kitchen door. I could just see 
the curates face, a dim, oval shape, and his collar and 

cuffs. Outside there began a metallic hammering, then a 

violent hooting, and then again,
 after a quiet interval, a 
hissing like the hissing of an 
engine. These noises, for the 
most part problematical, continued intermittently, and 

seemed if any- thing to increase in number as time wore 

on. Presently a measured thudding and a vibration that 

made everything about us quiver and the vessels in the 

pantry ring and shift, began and continued. Once the light 

was eclipsed, and the ghostly kitchen doorway became 

absolutely dark. For many hours we must have crouched 

there, silent and shiveri
ng, until our tired attention 
failed. At last I found myself aw
ake and very hungry. I am 
inclined to believe we must have spent the greater portion 

of a day before that awakening. My hunger was at a stride 

so insistent that it moved me 
to action. I told
 the curate I 
was going to seek food, and felt my way towards the 

pantry. He made me no answ
er, but so soon as I began 
eating the faint noise I made
 stirred him up and I heard 
him crawling after me. 
The War of the Worlds  
194 of 293 CHAPTER TWO 
 WHAT WE SAW FROM THE RUINED 
HOUSE After eating we crept back to
 the scullery, and there I 
must have dozed again, for wh
en presently I looked round 
I was alone. The thudding 
vibration continued with wearisome persistence. I whis
pered for the curate several 
times, and at last felt my way to the door of the kitchen. It 
was still day- light, and I pe
rceived him across the room, 
lying against the triangular hole that looked out upon the 
Martians. His shoulders were
 hunched, so that his head 
was hidden from me. 
I could hear a number of noi
ses almost like those in an 
engine shed; and the place ro
cked with that beating thud. 
Through the aperture in the wa
ll I could see the top of a 
tree touched with gold and 
the warm blue of a tranquil 
evening sky. For a minute or so I remained watching the 

curate, and then I advanced, crouching and stepping with 

extreme care amid the broken crockery that littered the 

floor. The War of the Worlds  
195 of 293 I touched the curates leg, and he started so violently 
that a mass of plaster went sliding down outside and fell 

with a loud impact. I grippe
d his arm, fearing he might 
cry out, and for a long time we crouched motionless. Then 

I turned to see how much of our rampart remained. The 

detachment of the plaster had 
left a vertical slit open in 
the debris, and by raising myse
lf cautiously across a beam 
I was able to see out of this gap into what had been 

overnight a quiet suburban 
roadway. Vast, indeed, was the change that we beheld. The fifth cylinder must have 
fallen right into the midst 
of the house we had first visited. The building had 

vanished, completely smashe
d, pulverised, and dispersed by the blow. The cylinder lay now far beneath the original 
foundations deep in a hole, already vastly larger than 

the pit I had looked into at Woking. The earth all round it 

had splashed under that tremendous impactsplashed is 

the only word and lay in h
eaped piles that hid the 
masses of the adjacent houses. It had behaved exactly like 

mud under the violent blow of a hammer. Our house had 

collapsed backward; the front portion, even on the ground 

floor, had been destroyed co
mpletely; by a chance the 
kitchen and scullery had es
caped, and stood buried now 
under soil and ruins, closed 
in by tons of earth on every 
The War of the Worlds  
196 of 293 side save towards the cylinder. Over that aspect we hung 
now on the very edge of the gr
eat circular pit the Martians 
were engaged in making. The heavy beating sound was 

evidently just behind us, and ever and again a bright green 
vapour drove up like a veil across our peephole. The cylinder was already opened in the centre of the 
pit, and on the farther edge of
 the pit, amid the smashed 
and gravel-heaped shrubbery, one of the great fighting-

machines, deserted by its occupant, stood stiff and tall 

against the evening sky. At fi
rst I scarcely noticed the pit 
and the cylinder, although 
it has been convenient to 
describe them first, on account of the extraordinary 

glittering mechanism I saw busy in the excavation, and on 

account of the strange creatures
 that were crawling slowly 
and painfully across the heaped mould near it. 
The mechanism it certainly was that held my attention 
first. It was one of those co
mplicated fabrics that have 
since been called handling-machines, and the study of 

which has already given such an enormous impetus to 

terrestrial invention. As it dawned upon me first, it 

presented a sort of metallic spider with five jointed, agile 

legs, and with an extraordinary number of jointed levers, 
bars, and reaching and clutching tentacles about its body. 
Most of its arms were re
tracted, but with three long 
The War of the Worlds  
197 of 293 tentacles it was fishing out a 
number of rods, plates, and 
bars which lined the covering and apparently strengthened 
the walls of the cylinder. These, as it extracted them, were 

lifted out and deposited upon 
a level surface of earth 
behind it. Its motion was so swift, co
mplex, and perfect that at 
first I did not see it as a machine, in spite of its metallic 

glitter. The fighting-machines were co-ordinated and 

animated to an extraordinary pitch, but nothing to 

compare with this. People 
who have never seen these 
structures, and have only the ill-imagined efforts of artists 

or the imperfect descriptions
 of such eye-witnesses as 
myself to go upon, scarcely realise that living quality. 
I recall particularly the illustration of one of the first 
pamphlets to give a consecutive account of the war. The 

artist had evidently made a hasty study of one of the 

fighting-machines, and there his knowledge ended. He 

presented them as tilted, stiff tripods, without either 

flexibility or subtlety, and w
ith an altogether misleading 
monotony of effect. The pa
mphlet containing these 
renderings had a considerable vogue, and I mention them 

here simply to warn the read
er against the impression they 
may have created. They were 
no more like the Martians I 
saw in action than a Dutch doll is like a human being. To 
The War of the Worlds  
198 of 293 my mind, the pamphlet woul
d have been much better 
without them. At first, I say, the hand
ling-machine did not impress 
me as a machine, but as a crablike creature with a 

glittering integument, the controlling Martian whose 

delicate tentacles actuated it
s movements seeming to be 
simply the equivalent of the crabs cerebral portion. But 

then I perceived the re- semblance of its grey-brown, 

shiny, leathery integument to that of the other sprawling 

bodies beyond, and the true nature of this dexterous 

workman dawned upon me. With
 that realisation my 
interest shifted to those other creatures, the real Martians. 

Already I had had a transient impression of these, and the 
first nausea no longer obscured my observation. 

Moreover, I was concealed and motionless, and under no 

urgency of action. They were, I now saw, the most unearthly creatures it 
is possible to conceive. 
They were huge round bodies
or, rather, headsabout four 
feet in diameter, each body 
having in front of it a face.
 This face had no nostrils
indeed, the Martians do not seem to have had any sense of 

smell, but it had a pair of very large dark-coloured eyes, 
and just beneath this a kind of fleshy beak. In the back of 
this head or bodyI scarcely
 know how to speak of it
The War of the Worlds  
199 of 293 was the single tight tympanic surface, since known to be 
anatomically an ear, though it must have been almost 

useless in our dense air. In a group round the mouth were 

sixteen slender, almost whip
like tentacles, arranged in 
two bunches of eight each. These bunches have since 

been named rather aptly, by th
at distinguished anatomist, 
Professor Howes, the HANDS. Even as I saw these 

Martians for the first time they seemed to be 

endeavouring to rais
e themselves on these hands, but of 
course, with the increased weight of terrestrial conditions, 

this was impossible. There is reason to suppose that on 

Mars they may have progressed upon them with some 

facility. 
The internal anatomy, I may remark here, as dissection 
has since shown, was almost equally simple. The greater 

part of the structure was 
the brain, sending enormous 
nerves to the eyes, ear, and ta
ctile tentacles. Besides this 
were the bulky lungs, into 
which the mouth opened, and 
the heart and its vessels. 
The pulmonary distress caused 
by the denser atmosphere and greater gravitational 

attraction was only too evident in the convulsive 
movements of the outer skin. 
And this was the sum of the Martian organs. Strange as 
it may seem to a human being, all the complex apparatus 
The War of the Worlds  
200 of 293 of digestion, which makes up the bulk of our bodies, did 
not exist in the Martians. They were headsmerely 

heads. Entrails they had none. 
They did not eat, much less 
digest. Instead, they took th
e fresh, living blood of other 
creatures, and INJECTED it in
to their own veins. I have 
myself seen this being done, 
as I shall mention in its 
place. But, squeamish as I may seem, I cannot bring 

myself to describe what I could not endure even to 

continue watching. Let it su
ffice to say, blood obtained 
from a still living animal, in most cases from a human 

being, was run directly by mean
s of a little pipette into the 
recipient canal. 
The bare idea of this is no doubt horribly repulsive to 
us, but at the same time I think that we should remember 

how repulsive our carnivorous habits would seem to an 

intelligent rabbit. 
The physiological advantages of the practice of 
injection are undeniable, if one
 thinks of the tremendous 
waste of human time and en
ergy occasioned by eating and the digestive process. Our 
bodies are half made up of 
glands and tubes and orga
ns, occupied in turning 
heterogeneous food into blood. The digestive processes 
and their reaction upon the nervous system sap our 
strength and colour our minds. Men go happy or 
The War of the Worlds  
201 of 293 miserable as they have healthy or unhealthy livers, or 
sound gastric glands. But the Ma
rtians were lifted above 
all these organic fluctuations of mood and emotion. 
Their undeniable preference for men as their source of 
nourishment is partly explained by the nature of the 

remains of the victims they had brought with them as 

provisions from Mars. These cr
eatures, to judge from the 
shrivelled remains that have fallen into human hands, 

were bipeds with flimsy, silicious skeletons (almost like 

those of the silicious sponges)
 and feeble musculature, 
standing about six feet high and having round, erect 

heads, and large eyes in flinty sockets. Two or three of 

these seem to have been brought in each cylinder, and all 

were killed before earth was 
reached. It was just as well 
for them, for the mere attempt to stand upright upon our 

planet would have broken every bone in their bodies. And while I am engaged in this description, I may add 
in this place certain furthe
r details which, although they were not all evident to us 
at the time, will enable the 
reader who is unacquainted w
ith them to form a clearer 
picture of these offensive creatures. 
In three other points their physiology differed strangely from ours. Their organisms di
d not sleep, any more than 
the heart of man sleeps. Si
nce they had no extensive 
The War of the Worlds  
202 of 293 muscular mechanism to recu
perate, that periodical 
extinction was unknown to them
. They had little or no 
sense of fatigue, it would seem
. On earth they could never 
have moved without effort, yet even to the last they kept 

in action. In twenty-four hour
s they did twenty-four hours 
of work, as even on earth is
 perhaps the case with the 
ants. In the next place, wonderful as it seems in a sexual 
world, the Martians were absolutely without sex, and 

therefore without any of th
e tumultuous emotions that 
arise from that difference among men. A young Martian, 

there can now be no dispute, 
was really born upon earth 
during the war, and it was f
ound attached to its parent, 
partially BUDDED off, just as
 young lilybulbs bud off, or 
like the young animals in 
the fresh-water polyp. In man, in all the higher terrestrial animals, such a 
method of increase has disappear
ed; but even on this earth it was certainly the primitive method. Among the lower 

animals, up even to those firs
t cousins of the vertebrated 
animals, the Tunicates, the two processes occur side by 

side, but finally the sexual method superseded its 
competitor altogether. On Mars, however, just the reverse 
has apparently been the case. The War of the Worlds  
203 of 293 It is worthy of remark that
 a certain speculative writer 
of quasi-scientific repute, wr
iting long before the Martian 
invasion, did forecast for man a final structure not unlike 

the actual Martian condition. His prophecy, I remember, 

appeared in November or December, 1893, in a long-

defunct publication, the PALL MALL BUDGET, and I 

recall a caricature of it in a 
pre-Martian periodical called PUNCH. He pointed out wr
iting in a foolish, facetious 
tonethat the perfection of m
echanical appliances must 
ultimately supersede limbs; the perfection of chemical 

devices, digestion; that such or
gans as hair, external nose, 
teeth, ears, and chin were no 
longer essential parts of the 
human being, and that the te
ndency of natural selection 
would lie in the direction 
of their steady diminution 
through the coming ages. The brain alone remained a 

cardinal necessity. Only one other part of the body had a 

strong case for survival, and that was the hand, teacher 
and agent of the brain. While the rest of the body 

dwindled, the hands would grow larger. There is many a true word wr
itten in jest, and here in 
the Martians we have beyond dispute the actual 

accomplishment of such a suppression of the animal side 
of the organism by the intelligence. To me it is quite 
credible that the Martians may be descended from beings 
The War of the Worlds  
204 of 293 not unlike ourselves, by a gr
adual development of brain 
and hands (the latter giving 
rise to the two bunches of 
delicate tentacles at last) at th
e expense of the rest of the 
body. Without the body the brain would, of course, 

become a mere selfish intel
ligence, without any of the 
emotional substratum of the human being. 
The last salient point in which the systems of these 
creatures differed from ours was in what one might have 

thought a very trivial particul
ar. Micro-organisms, which 
cause so much disease and pain on earth, have either 

never appeared upon Mars or Martian sanitary science 

eliminated them ages ago. A hundred diseases, all the 

fevers and contagions of 
human life, consumption, 
cancers, tumours and such mo
rbidities, never enter the 
scheme of their life. And 
speaking of the differences 
between the life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may allude 

here to the curious suggestions of the red weed. Apparently the vegetable ki
ngdom in Mars, instead of 
having green for a dominant 
colour, is of a vivid blood-
red tint. At any rate, the seeds which the Martians 

(intentionally or accidentally) br
ought with them gave rise 
in all cases to red-coloured
 growths. Only that known 
popularly as the red weed, howev
er, gained any footing in 
competition with terrestrial forms. The red creeper was 
The War of the Worlds  
205 of 293 quite a transitory 
growth, and few people have seen it 
growing. For a time, however, the red weed grew with 

astonishing vigour and luxurianc
e. It spread up the sides 
of the pit by the third or four
th day of our imprisonment, 
and its cactus-like branches formed a carmine fringe to 

the edges of our triangular
 window. And afterwards I 
found it broadcast throughout th
e country, and especially wherever there was a stream of water. 
The Martians had what a
ppears to have been an 
auditory organ, a single round 
drum at the back of the 
head-body, and eyes with a visu
al range not very different 
from ours except that, according to Philips, blue and 

violet were as black to them. It is commonly supposed 

that they communicated by sounds and tentacular 

gesticulations; this is asserted, for instance, in the able but 

hastily compiled pamphlet (w
ritten evidently by someone 
not an eye-witness of Martia
n actions) to which I have 
already alluded, and which, so
 far, has been the chief 
source of information concerning them. Now no surviving 

human being saw so much of 
the Martians in action as I 
did. I take no credit to myself
 for an accident, but the fact 
is so. And I assert that I watched them closely time after 
time, and that I have seen f
our, five, and (once) six of 
them sluggishly performi
ng the most elaborately 
The War of the Worlds  
206 of 293 complicated operations togeth
er without either sound or 
gesture. Their peculiar hooting invariably preceded feed- 

ing; it had no modulation, and 
was, I believe, in no sense 
a signal, but merely the expi
ration of air pr
eparatory to the suctional operation. I have 
a certain claim to at least 
an elementary knowledge of
 psychology, and in this 
matter I am convincedas firm
ly as I am convinced of 
anythingthat the Martia
ns interchanged thoughts 
without any physical intermediation. And I have been 

convinced of this in spite
 of strong preconceptions. 
Before the Martian invasion, as
 an occasional reader here 
or there may remember, I had written with some little 

vehemence against the telepathic theory. 
The Martians wore no clot
hing. Their conceptions of 
ornament and decorum were necessarily different from 

ours; and not only were they evidently much less sensible 

of changes of temperature th
an we are, but changes of 
pressure do not seem to have affected their health at all 

seriously. Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in the 

other artificial additions to their bodily resources that their 
great superiority over man lay. 
We men, with our bicycles 
and road-skates, our Lilienthal soaring-machines, our 
guns and sticks and so forth, are just in the beginning of 
the evolution that the Martia
ns have worked out. They 
The War of the Worlds  
207 of 293 have become practically mere
 brains, wearing different 
bodies according to their needs 
just as men wear suits of 
clothes and take a bicycle in a 
hurry or an umbrella in the 
wet. And of their appliances, perhaps nothing is more 

wonderful to a man than the cu
rious fact that what is the 
dominant feature of almo
st all human devices in 
mechanism is absentthe WHEEL is absent; among all 

the things they brought to 
earth there is no trace or 
suggestion of their use of wheel
s. One would have at least 
expected it in locomotion. And 
in this connection it is 
curious to remark that even 
on this earth Nature has never 
hit upon the wheel, or has preferred other expedients to its 

development. And not only di
d the Martians either not 
know of (which is incredible),
 or abstain from, the wheel, 
but in their apparatus singularly
 little use is made of the 
fixed pivot or relatively fixed 
pivot, with circular motions 
thereabout confined to one plan
e. Almost all the joints of 
the machinery present a complicated system of sliding 

parts moving over small but beautifully curved friction 

bearings. And while upon this
 matter of detail, it is 
remarkable that the long leve
rages of their machines are 
in most cases actuated by a so
rt of sham musculature of 
the disks in an elastic sheath; these disks become 
polarised and drawn closely and powerfully together 
The War of the Worlds  
208 of 293 when traversed by a current of electricity. In this way the 
curious parallelism to animal motions, which was so 

striking and disturbing to
 the human beholder, was 
attained. Such quasi-muscles abounded in the crablike 

handling-machine which, on my first peeping out of the 

slit, I watched un- packing the cylinder. It seemed 

infinitely more alive than the actual Martians lying 

beyond it in the sunset light, 
panting, stirring ineffectual tentacles, and moving feebly
 after their 
vast journey 
across space. 
While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the 
sunlight, and noting each strange detail of their form, the 
curate reminded me of his presence by pulling violently at 

my arm. I turned to a scow
ling face, and silent, eloquent lips. He wanted the slit, which permitted only one of us to 

peep through; and so I had to
 forego watching them for a 
time while he enjoyed that privilege. 
When I looked again, the busy handling-machine had 
already put together several of the pieces of apparatus it 

had taken out of the cylinder 
into a shape having an un- 
mistakable likeness to its own; and down on the left a 

busy little digging mechanism had come into view, 
emitting jets of green vapour and working its way round 
the pit, excavating and embanking in a methodical and 
The War of the Worlds  
209 of 293 discriminating manner. This it was which had caused the 
regular beating noise, and the rhythmic shocks that had 

kept our ruinous refuge quive
r- ing. It piped and whistled 
as it worked. So far as I coul
d see, the thing was without a directing Martian at all. The War of the Worlds  
210 of 293 CHAPTER THREE 
 THE DAYS OF IMPRISONMENT The arrival of a second fighting-machine drove us 
from our peephole into the sc
ullery, for we feared that 
from his elevation the Martian might see down upon us 

behind our barrier. At a later date
 we began to feel less in 
danger of their eyes, for to an eye in the dazzle of the 

sunlight outside our refuge must have been blank 

blackness, but at first the slig
htest suggestion of approach 
drove us into the scullery in heart-throbbing retreat. Yet 

terrible as was the danger we incurred, the attraction of 

peeping was for both of us ir
resistible. And I recall now with a sort of wonder that, in
 spite of the infinite danger 
in which we were between starvation and a still more 

terrible death, we could yet struggle bitterly for that 

horrible privilege of sight
. We would race across the 
kitchen in a grotesque way 
between eagerness and the 
dread of making a noise, and st
rike each other, and thrust 
add kick, within a few inches of exposure. The fact is that we had absolutely incompatible 
dispositions and habits of
 thought and action, and our 
The War of the Worlds  
211 of 293 danger and isolation only accentuated the incompatibility. 
At Halliford I had al- ready come to hate the curates trick 

of helpless exclamation, his 
stupid rigidity of mind. His 
endless muttering monologue vitiated every effort I made 

to think out a line of action, and drove me at times, thus 

pent up and intensified, almost
 to the verge of craziness. 
He was as lacking in restrain
t as a silly woman. He would 
weep for hours together, and I 
verily believe that to the 
very end this spoiled child 
of life thought his weak tears 
in some way efficacious. And I would sit in the darkness 

unable to keep my mind off him by reason of his 

importunities. He ate more than I did, and it was in vain I 

pointed out that our only chan
ce of life was to stop in the 
house until the Martians had don
e with their p
it, that in 
that long patience a time might presently come when we 

should need food. He ate and 
drank impulsively in heavy 
meals at long intervals. He slept little. 
As the days wore on, his 
utter carelessness of any 
consideration so intensified our distress and danger that I 

had, much as I loathed doing it, to resort to threats, and at 

last to blows. That brought him to reason for a time. But 

he was one of those weak cr
eatures, void of pride, 
timorous, anaemic, hateful soul
s, full of shifty cunning, 
The War of the Worlds  
212 of 293 who face neither God nor man, who face not even 
themselves. 
It is disagreeable for me to recall and write these 
things, but I set them down 
that my story may lack 
nothing. Those who have escaped
 the dark an
d terrible aspects of life will find my br
utality, my flash of rage in 
our final tragedy, easy enough to blame; for they know 

what is wrong as well as a
ny, but not what is possible to 
tortured men. But those who have been under the shadow, 

who have gone down at last to
 elemental things, will have 
a wider charity. And while within we fought 
out our dark, dim contest 
of whispers, snatched food 
and drink, and gripping hands and blows, without, in the pitile
ss sunlight of 
that terrible 
June, was the strange wonder, the unfamiliar routine of 

the Martians in the pit. Let me return to those first new 

experiences of mine. After a 
long time I ventured back to 
the peephole, to find that 
the new-comers had been 
reinforced by the occupants of no fewer than three of the 

fighting- machines. These la
st had brought with them 
certain fresh appliances that
 stood in an orderly manner 
about the cylinder. The second handling-machine was 
now completed, and was busie
d in serving one of the 
novel contrivances the big m
achine had brought. This was 
The War of the Worlds  
213 of 293 a body resembling a milk can in
 its general form, above 
which oscillated a pear-shaped receptacle, and from 

which a stream of white powde
r flowed into a circular 
basin below. The oscillatory motion was imparted to this by one 
tentacle of the handling-machine. With two spatulate 

hands the handling-machine wa
s digging out and flinging 
masses of clay into the p
ear-shaped receptacle above, 
while with another arm it pe
riodically opened a door and 
removed rusty and blackened clinkers from the middle 

part of the machine. Another 
steely tentacle directed the 
powder from the basin along a ribbed channel towards 

some receiver that was hidden from me by the mound of 

bluish dust. From this unseen 
receiver a little thread of 
green smoke rose vertically in
to the quiet ai
r. As I looked, 
the handling-machine, with a faint and musical clinking, 

extended, telescopic fashion, 
a tentacle that had been a 
moment before a mere blunt 
projection, until its end was 
hidden behind the mound of clay. In another second it had 

lifted a bar of white aluminiu
m into sight, untarnished as 
yet, and shining dazzlingly, a
nd deposited it in a growing 
stack of bars that stood at 
the side of the pit. Between 
sunset and starlight this de
xterous machine must have 
made more than a hundred such bars out of the crude clay, 
The War of the Worlds  
214 of 293 and the mound of bluish dust rose steadily until it topped 
the side of the pit. 
The contrast between the swift and complex 
movements of these contriva
nces and the inert panting 
clumsiness of their masters was acute, and for days I had 

to tell myself repeatedly that these latter were indeed the 

living of the two things. 
The curate had possession of the slit when the first 
men were brought to the pit. I was sitting below, huddled 

up, listening with all my ears. He made a sudden 

movement backward, and I, fearful that we were 

observed, crouched in a spasm of terror. He came sliding 

down the rubbish and crept be
side me in the darkness, 
inarticulate, gesticulating, a
nd for a moment I shared his 
panic. His gesture suggested a 
resignation of the slit, and 
after a little while my curiosity gave me courage, and I 

rose up, stepped across him, 
and clambered up to it. At 
first I could see no reason for his frantic behaviour. The 

twilight had now come, the star
s were little and faint, but 
the pit was illuminated by the flickering green fire that 

came from the aluminium-making. The whole picture was 

a flickering scheme of green gleams and shifting rusty 
black shadows, strangely trying to the eyes. Over and 
through it all went the bats, heeding it not at all. The 
The War of the Worlds  
215 of 293 sprawling Martians were no l
onger to be seen, the mound 
of blue-green powder had rise
n to cover them from sight, 
and a fighting-machine, w
ith its legs contracted, 
crumpled, and abbreviated, stood across the corner of the 

pit. And then, amid the cla
ngour of the machinery, came a 
drifting suspicion of human voi
ces, that I entertained at 
first only to dismiss. 
I crouched, watching this fighting-machine closely, 
satisfy- ing myself now for th
e first time that the hood did 
indeed contain a Martian. As the green flames lifted I 

could see the oily gleam 
of his integument and the 
brightness of his eyes. And 
suddenly I heard a yell, and 
saw a long tentacle reach- i
ng over the shoulder of the 
machine to the little cage that hunched upon its back. 

Then somethingsomething struggling violentlywas 

lifted high against the sky, a black, vague enigma against 
the starlight; and as this bl
ack object came down again, I 
saw by the green brightness 
that it was a man. For an 
instant he was clearly visible. He was a stout, ruddy, 

middle-aged man, well dressed; three days before, he 

must have been walking the wo
rld, a man of considerable 
consequence. I could see his staring eyes and gleams of 
light on his studs and watch chain. He vanished behind 
the mound, and for a moment th
ere was silence. And then 
The War of the Worlds  
216 of 293 began a shrieking and a sustained and cheerful hooting 
from the Martians. 
I slid down the rubb
ish, struggled to my feet, clapped 
my hands over my ears, and 
bolted into the scullery. The 
curate, who had been crouching
 silently with his arms 
over his head, looked up as 
I passed, cried out quite 
loudly at my desertion of him, and came running after me. 
That night, as we lurked in the scullery, balanced 
between our horror and the terrible fascination this 

peeping had, al- though I felt 
an urgent need of action I 
tried in vain to conceive some plan of escape; but 

afterwards, during the second day, I was able to consider 
our position with great clear
ness. The curate, I found, was 
quite incapable of discussion; this new and culminating 

atrocity had robbed him of all vestiges of reason or 

forethought. Practically he ha
d already sunk to the level 
of an animal. But as the sa
ying goes, I gripped myself 
with both hands. It grew 
upon my mind, once I could face 
the facts, that terrible as our 
position was, there was as yet 
no justification for absolute despair. Our chief chance lay 

in the possibility of the Martians making the pit nothing 

more than a temporary encampment. Or even if they kept 
it permanently, they might not consider it necessary to 
guard it, and a chance of escape might be afforded us. I 
The War of the Worlds  
217 of 293 also weighed very car
efully the possibil
ity of our digging 
a way out in a direction away from the pit, but the 

chances of our emerging within sight of some sentinel 

fighting-machine seemed at first too great. And I should 

have had to do all the digging myself. The curate would 

certainly have failed me. 
It was on the third day, if my memory serves me right, 
that I saw the lad killed. 
It was the only occasion on 
which I actually saw the Martians feed. After that 

experience I avoided the hole in the wall for the better 
part of a day. I went into the scullery, removed the door, 

and spent some hours digging with
 my hatchet as silently 
as possible; but when I had 
made a hole about a couple of 
feet deep the loose earth co
llapsed noisily, and I did not 
dare continue. I lost heart,
 and lay down on the scullery 
floor for a long time, having no spirit even to move. And 

after that I abandoned altogeth
er the idea of escaping by 
excavation. It says much for the impression the Martians had made 
upon me that at first I entert
ained little or no hope of our 
escape being brought about by their overthrow through 

any human effort. But on the four
th or fifth night I heard a sound like heavy guns. The War of the Worlds  
218 of 293 It was very late in the ni
ght, and the moon was shining brightly. The Martians had taken away the excavating- 

machine, and, save for a figh
ting-machine that stood in 
the remoter bank of the pit and a handling-machine that 

was buried out of my sight 
in a corner of the pit 
immediately beneath my peephole, the place was deserted 

by them. Except for the pale glow from the handling-

machine and the bars and patc
hes of white moonlight the 
pit was in dark- ness, and, except for the clinking of the 

handling-machine, quite still.
 That night was a beautiful 
serenity; save for one planet
, the moon seemed to have 
the sky to herself. I heard a dog howling, and that familiar 

sound it was that made me listen. Then I heard quite 

distinctly a booming ex- actly like the sound of great 

guns. Six distinct reports I 
counted, and after a long interval six again. And that was all. The War of the Worlds  
219 of 293 CHAPTER FOUR 
 THE DEATH OF THE CURATE It was on the sixth day of our imprisonment that I 
peeped for the last time, and presently found myself 

alone. Instead of keeping close to me and trying to oust 

me from the slit, the curate had gone back into the 

scullery. I was struck by a 
sudden thought. I went back 
quickly and quietly into the scullery. In the darkness I 

heard the curate drink- ing. I snatched in the darkness, and my fingers caught a bottle of burgundy. For a few minutes there was 
a tussle. The bottle struck 
the floor and broke, and I de
sisted and rose. We stood 
panting and threatening each other. In the end I planted 

myself between him and the 
food, and told him of my 
determination to begin a disc
ipline. I divide
d the food in the pantry, into rations to last us ten days. I would not let 

him eat any more that day. 
In the afternoon he made a 
feeble effort to get at the food. I had been dozing, but in 
an instant I was awake. All 
day and all night we sat face 
to face, I weary but resolute, and he weeping and 

complaining of his immediat
e hunger. It was, I know, a 
The War of the Worlds  
220 of 293 night and a day, but to me it seemedit seems nowan 
interminable length of time. 
And so our widened incompa
tibility ended at last in 
open conflict. For two vast days we struggled in 

undertones and wrestling contests. There were times when 
I beat and kicked him madly, times when I cajoled and 

persuaded him, and once I tried to bribe him with the last 

bottle of burgundy, for there was a rain-water pump from 

which I could get water. But neither force nor kindness 

availed; he was indeed be
yond reason. He would neither 
desist from his attacks on the food nor from his noisy 

babbling to himself. The rudi
mentary precautions to keep 
our imprisonment endurable
 he would not observe. 
Slowly I began to realise th
e complete overthrow of his 
intelligence, to perceive that my sole companion in this 

close and sickly darkness was a man insane. 
From certain vague memories I am inclined to think 
my own mind wandered at times. I had strange and 

hideous dreams whenever I sl
ept. It sounds paradoxical, 
but I am inclined to think that the weakness and insanity 

of the curate warned me, braced me, and kept me a sane 

man. 
The War of the Worlds  
221 of 293 On the eighth day he began to talk aloud instead of 
whispering, and nothing I co
uld do would moderate his 
speech. It is just, O God! he woul
d say, over and over again. 
It is just. On me and mine be the punishment laid. We 

have sinned, we have falle
n short. There was poverty, 
sorrow; the poor were trodden in the dust, and I held my 

peace. I preached acceptable follymy God, what folly! 

when I should have stood up, 
though I died for it, and 
called upon them to repent-repent!  Oppressors of the 

poor and needy  ! The wine press of God! Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the 
food I withheld from him, praying, begging, weeping, at 

last threatening. He began 
to raise his voiceI prayed 
him not to. He perceived a 
hold on mehe threatened he 
would shout and bring the Martians upon us. For a time 

that scared me; but any con
cession would have shortened 
our chance of escape beyond 
estimating. I defied him, 
although I felt no assurance that he might not do this 
thing. But that day, at any rate
, he did not. He talked with 
his voice rising slowly, through the greater part of the 

eighth and ninth days threats, entreaties, mingled with a 
torrent of half-sane and always frothy repentance for his 
vacant sham of Gods service, 
such as made me pity him. 
The War of the Worlds  
222 of 293 Then he slept awhile, and began again with renewed 
strength, so loudly that I mu
st needs make him desist. 
Be still! I implored. 
He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the 
dark- ness near the copper. I have been still too long, he
 said, in a tone that must 
have reached the pit, and now
 I must bear my witness. 
Woe unto this unfaithful city! Woe! Woe! Woe! Woe! 

Woe! To the inhabitants of 
the earth by reason of the 
other voices of the trumpet 
Shut up! I said, rising to my
 feet, and in a terror lest 
the Martians should hear us. For Gods sake Nay, shouted the curate, at the top of his voice, stand- ing likewise and extending his arms. Speak! The word of 

the Lord is upon me! 
In three strides he was at the door leading into the 
kitchen. I must bear my witness! I 
go! It has already been too 
long delayed. I put out my hand and felt the meat chopper hanging to 
the wall. In a flash I was afte
r him. I was fierce with fear. 
Before he was halfway across the kitchen I had overtaken 
him. With one last touch of 
humanity I turned the blade 
back and struck him with the butt. He went headlong for- 
The War of the Worlds  
223 of 293 ward and lay stretched on 
the ground. I stumbled over 
him and stood panting. He lay still. 
Suddenly I heard a noise wit
hout, the run and smash of 
slipping plaster, and the tr
iangular aperture in the wall 
was darkened. I looked up and saw the lower surface of a 
handling-machine coming slowly across the hole. One of 

its gripping limbs curled am
id the debris; another limb 
appeared, feeling its way over the fallen beams. I stood 

petrified, staring. Then I saw through a sort of glass plate 

near the edge of the body the face, as we may call it, and 

the large dark eyes of a Mart
ian, peering, and then a long 
metallic snake of tentacle came feeling slowly through the 

hole. I turned by an effort, stumbled over the curate, and 
stopped at the scullery door. 
The tentacle was now some 
way, two yards or more, in the room, and twisting and 

turn- ing, with queer sudden movements, this way and 

that. For a while I stood fasc
inated by that slow, fitful 
advance. Then, with a faint, hoarse cry, I forced myself 

across the scullery. I trembled violently; I could scarcely 

stand upright. I opened the door of the coal cellar, and 

stood there in the darkness staring at the faintly lit 
doorway into the kitchen, and listen- ing. Had the Martian 
seen me? What was it doing now? 
The War of the Worlds  
224 of 293 Something was moving to and 
fro there, very quietly; 
every now and then it tapped 
against the wall, or started 
on its movements with a faint metallic ringing, like the 

movements of keys on a spl
it-ring. Then a heavy bodyI 
knew too well whatwas dragge
d across the floor of the 
kitchen towards the opening. Irresistibly attr
acted, I crept to the door and peeped into th
e kitchen. In the triangle of 
bright outer sunlight I saw the Martian, in its Briareus of a handling-machine, scrutinizing the curates head. I 

thought at once that it would infer my presence from the 

mark of the blow I had given him. 
I crept back to the coal cellar, shut the door, and began 
to cover myself up as much as I could, and as noiselessly 

as possible in the darkness, among the firewood and coal 

therein. Every now and then I paused, rigid, to hear if the 

Martian had thrust its tentacl
es through the opening again. Then the faint metallic jingle returned. I traced it 
slowly feeling over the kitchen. Presently I heard it 

nearerin the scullery, as I judged. I thought that its 

length might be in- sufficient to reach me. I prayed 

copiously. It passed, scrap- 
ing faintly across the cellar 
door. An age of almost intole
rable suspense intervened; 
then I heard it fumbling at the latch! It had found the 
door! The Martians understood doors! The War of the Worlds  
225 of 293 It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, and then 
the door opened. In the darkness I could just see the thinglike an 
elephants trunk more than anything elsewaving 

towards me and touching and examining the wall, coals, 

wood and ceil- ing. It was like a black worm swaying its 

blind head to and fro. Once, even, it touched the heel of my boot. I was on 
the verge of screaming; I bit my hand. For a time the 

tentacle was silent. I could have fancied it had been 

withdrawn. Presently, with an
 abrupt click, it gripped 
somethingI thought it had me!and seemed to go out 

of the cellar again. For a minute I was not sure. 

Apparently it had taken a lump of coal to examine. 
I seized the opportunity of
 slightly shifting my 
position, which had become cramped, and then listened. I 

whispered passionate prayers for safety. 
Then I heard the slow, deliberate sound creeping 
towards me again. Slowly, slowly it drew near, scratching 

against the walls and tapping the furniture. 
While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the 
cellar door and closed it. I hear
d it go into the pantry, and 
the biscuit-tins rattled a
nd a bottle smashed, and then 
The War of the Worlds  
226 of 293 came a heavy bump against th
e cellar door. Then silence 
that passed into an infinity of suspense. Had it gone? 
At last I decided that it had. 
It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth 
day in the close darkness, buried among coals and 

firewood, not daring even to 
crawl out for the drink for 
which I craved. It was the elev
enth day before I ventured 
so far from my security. 
The War of the Worlds  
227 of 293 CHAPTER FIVE 
 THE STILLNESS My first act before I went into the pantry was to fasten 
the door between the kitchen and the scullery. But the 

pantry was empty; ever
y scrap of food had gone. 
Apparently, the Martian had taken it all on the previous 
day. At that discovery I despai
red for the first time. I took 
no food, or no drink either, on th
e eleventh or the twelfth 
day. At first my mouth and thro
at were parched, and my 
strength ebbed sensibly. I sat 
about in the darkness of the 
scullery, in a state of des
pondent wretchedness. My mind 
ran on eating. I thought I had become deaf, for the noises 

of movement I had been accustomed to hear from the pit 

had ceased absolutely. I di
d not feel strong enough to 
crawl noiselessly to the peephole, or I would have gone 

there. On the twelfth day my throat was so painful that, 
taking the chance of alarming the Martians, I attacked the 

creaking rain-water pump that
 stood by the sink, and got a 
couple of glassfuls of blackened
 and tainted rain water. I 
The War of the Worlds  
228 of 293 was greatly refreshed by this
, and emboldened by the fact that no enquiring tentacle followed the noise of my 

pumping. 
During these days, in a rambling, inconclusive way, I 
thought much of the curate and of the manner of his 

death. On the thirteenth day I drank some more water, and 
dozed and thought disjointedly
 of eating and of vague 
impossible plans of escape. Whenever I dozed I dreamt of 

horrible phantasms, of the de
ath of the curate, or of 
sumptuous dinners; but, asleep
 or awake, I felt a keen 
pain that urged me to drink 
again and again. The light that 
came into the scullery was no 
longer grey, but red. To my 
disordered imagination it seemed the colour of blood. 
On the fourteenth day I we
nt into the kitchen, and I 
was surprised to find that the fronds of the red weed had 

grown right across the hole in 
the wall, turning the half-
light of the place into a crimson-coloured obscurity. 
It was early on the fifteenth 
day that I heard a curious, 
familiar sequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening, 

identified it as the snuffing and scratching of a dog. Going 
into the kitchen, I saw a dogs nose peering in through a 
break among the ruddy fronds. This greatly surprised me. 
At the scent of me he barked shortly. 
The War of the Worlds  
229 of 293 I thought if I could induce him to come into the place 
quietly I should be able, perhaps, to kill and eat him; and 

in any case, it would be advisable to kill him, lest his 

actions attracted the attention of the Martians. 
I crept forward, saying Good dog! very softly; but he 
suddenly withdrew his head and disappeared. I listenedI was not deaf
but certainly the pit was 
still. I heard a sound like the fl
utter of a birds wings, and 
a hoarse croaking, but that was all. For a long while I lay close 
to the peephole, but not 
daring to move aside the red plants that obscured it. Once 

or twice I heard a faint pitter-patter like the feet of the dog going hither and thither on the sand far below me, and 

there were more birdlike sounds, but that was all. At 

length, encouraged by the silence, I looked out. Except in the corner, where a multitude of crows 
hopped and fought over the skeletons of the dead the 

Martians had consumed, there was not a living thing in 

the pit. I stared about me, scarcely 
believing my eyes. All the 
machinery had gone. Save for the big mound of greyish-

blue powder in one corner, ce
rtain bars of aluminium in 
another, the black birds, and 
the skeletons of the killed, 
the place was merely an empt
y circular pit in the sand. The War of the Worlds  
230 of 293 Slowly I thrust myself out through the red weed, and 
stood upon the mound of rubble. I could see in any 

direction save behind me, to the north, and neither 

Martians nor sign of Martians were to be seen. The pit 

dropped sherry from my feet
, but a little way along the 
rubbish afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the 

ruins. My chance of escape had come. I began to tremble. 
I hesitated for some time, and then, in a gust of 
desperate resolution, and with a heart that throbbed 

violently, I scrambled to the top of the mound in which I 

had been buried so long. I looked about again. To the northward, too, no 
Martian was visible. When I had last seen this part of Sheen in the daylight 
it had been a straggling street of comfortable white and 

red houses, interspersed with abundant shady trees. Now I 

stood on a mound of smashed brickwork, clay, and gravel, 

over which spread a multitude of red cactus-shaped 

plants, knee-high, without a solitary terrestrial growth to 

dispute their footing. The trees near me were dead and 

brown, but further a network of 
red thread scaled the still 
living stems. 
The neighbouring houses ha
d all been wrecked, but 
none had been burned; their walls stood, sometimes to the 
The War of the Worlds  
231 of 293 second story, with smashed windows and shattered doors. 
The red weed grew tumultuously
 in their roofless rooms. 
Below me was the great pit, with the crows struggling for 

its refuse. A number of other birds hopped about among 

the ruins. Far away I saw a gaunt cat slink crushingly 

along a wall, but traces of men there were none. 
The day seemed, by contrast with my recent 
confinement, dazzlingly bright
, the sky a glowing blue. A 
gentle breeze kept the red weed that covered every scrap 

of unoccupied ground gently swaying. And oh! the 

sweetness of the air! 
The War of the Worlds  
232 of 293 CHAPTER SIX 
 THE WORK OF FIFTEEN DAYS For some time I stood 
tottering on the mound regardless of my safety. W
ithin that noisome den from 
which I had emerged I had thought with a narrow 

intensity only of our imme
diate security. I had not realised what had been ha
ppening to the world, had not 
anticipated this startling vision of unfamiliar things. I had 

expected to see Sheen in 
ruins I found about me the 
landscape, weird and lurid, of another planet. For that moment I touche
d an emotion beyond the 
common range of men, yet one that the poor brutes we 

dominate know only too well. I felt as a rabbit might feel 

returning to his burrow and suddenly confronted by the 

work of a dozen busy navvies digging the foundations of 

a house. I felt the first inklin
g of a thing that presently 
grew quite clear in my mind, that oppressed me for many 
days, a sense of dethronement, a persuasion that I was no 
longer a master, but an anim
al among the animals, under 
the Martian heel. With us it would be as with them, to 
The War of the Worlds  
233 of 293 lurk and watch, to run and hi
de; the fear and empire of 
man had passed away. 
But so soon as this strangeness had been realised it 
passed, and my dominant motive became the hunger of 

my long and dismal fast. In the direction away from the 

pit I saw, beyond a red-covered wall, a patch of garden 

ground un- buried. This gave me
 a hint, and I went knee-
deep, and sometimes neck-deep, in the red weed. The 

density of the weed gave me
 a reassuring sense of hiding. 
The wall was some six feet high, and when I attempted to 

clamber it I found I could not lift my feet to the crest. So I 

went along by the side of it, and came to a corner and a 

rockwork that enabled me to
 get to the top, and tumble 
into the garden I cove
ted. Here I found some young 
onions, a couple of gladiolus bulbs, and a quantity of 

immature carrots, all of which I secured, and, scrambling 

over a ruined wall, went on my way through scarlet and 

crimson trees towards Kew it was like walking through 

an avenue of gigantic blood dropspossessed with two 

ideas: to get more food, and to 
limp, as soon and as far as 
my strength permitted, out of this accursed unearthly 

region of the pit. Some way farther, in a gr
assy place, was a group of 
mush- rooms which also I 
devoured, and then I came 
The War of the Worlds  
234 of 293 upon a brown sheet of flowing shallow water, where 
meadows used to be. These fragments of nourishment 

served only to whet my hunger. 
At first I was surprised at 
this flood in a hot, dry su
mmer, but afterwards I 
discovered that it was caused
 by the tropical exuberance 
of the red weed. Directly this extraordinary growth 

encountered water it straightway became gigantic and of 

unparalleled fecundity. Its seeds were simply poured 

down into the water of the Wey and Thames, and its 

swiftly growing and Titanic 
water fronds speedily choked 
both those rivers. At Putney, as I afterwards saw, the bridge was almost 
lost in a tangle of this 
weed, and at Richmond, too, the 
Thames water poured in a broad and shallow stream 

across the meadows of Hampton and Twickenham. As the 

water spread the weed followed them, until the ruined 

villas of the Thames valley were
 for a time lost in this red 
swamp, whose margin I explored, and much of the 

desolation the Martians had caused was concealed. 
In the end the red weed succumbed almost as quickly 
as it had spread. A cankering di
sease, due, it is believed, 
to the action of certain bact
eria, presently seized upon it. 
Now by the action of natural 
selection, all terrestrial 
plants have acquired a resisting power against bacterial 
The War of the Worlds  
235 of 293 diseasesthey never succumb 
without a severe struggle, 
but the red weed rotted lik
e a thing already dead. The fronds became bleached, and th
en shrivelled and brittle. 
They broke off at the least touch, and the waters that had 

stimulated their early growth carried their last vestiges out 

to sea. My first act on coming to this water was, of course, to 
slake my thirst. I drank a grea
t deal of it and, moved by an 
impulse, gnawed some fronds of
 red weed; but they were 
watery, and had a sickly, meta
llic taste. I found the water 
was sufficiently shallow for me to wade securely, 

although the red weed impeded my feet a little; but the 

flood evidently got d
eeper towards the ri
ver, and I turned 
back to Mortlake. I managed to make out the road by 

means of occasional ruins of its villas and fences and 

lamps, and so presently I got out of this spate and made 

my way to the hill going up towards Roehampton and 

came out on Putney Common. 
Here the scenery changed from the strange and 
unfamiliar to the wreckage of the familiar: patches of 

ground exhibited the devastation of a cyclone, and in a 
few score yards I would come upon perfectly undisturbed 
spaces, houses with their bli
nds trimly drawn and doors 
closed, as if they had been left for a day by the owners, or 
The War of the Worlds  
236 of 293 as if their inhabitants slept within. The red weed was less 
abundant; the tall trees along th
e lane were free from the 
red creeper. I hunted for food among the trees, finding 

nothing, and I also raided a c
ouple of silent houses, but 
they had already been broken 
into and ransacked. I rested 
for the remainder of the day- 
light in a shrubbery, being, 
in my enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on. 
All this time I saw no huma
n beings, and no signs of 
the Martians. I encountered a couple of hungry-looking 

dogs, but both hurried circuitously away from the 

advances I made them. Near Roehampton I had seen two 

human skeletons not bodies, but skeletons, picked 

cleanand in the wood by me I found the crushed and 

scattered bones of several cats
 and rabbits and the skull of 
a sheep. But though I gnawed parts of these in my mouth, 

there was nothing to be got from them. 
After sunset I struggled 
on along the road towards 
Putney, where I think the Heat-Ray must have been used 

for some reason. And in the garden beyond Roehampton I 

got a quantity of immature potat
oes, sufficient to stay my 
hunger. From this garden one looked down upon Putney 

and the river. The aspect of the place in the dusk was 
singularly desolate: blackened 
trees, blackened, desolate 
ruins, and down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, 
The War of the Worlds  
237 of 293 red-tinged with the weed. And 
over allsilence. It filled 
me with indescribable terror 
to think how swiftly that 
desolating change had come. 
For a time I believed that 
mankind had been swept out 
of existence, and that I stood 
there alone, the last man left 
alive. Hard by the top of Putney Hill I came upon another 

skeleton, with the arms disl
ocated and removed several 
yards from the rest of the body. As I proceeded I became 

more and more convinced that the extermination of 

mankind was, save for such stragglers as myself, already 

accomplished in this part of the world. The Martians, I 

thought, had gone on and left
 the country desolated, 
seeking food elsewhere. Perhaps even now they were 

destroying Berlin or Paris, or it might be they had gone 

northward. The War of the Worlds  
238 of 293 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL 
I spent that night in the inn 
that stands at the top of 
Putney Hill, sleeping in a made bed for the first time since 

my flight to Leatherhead. I 
will not tell the needless 
trouble I had breaking into that houseafterwards I found 
the front door was on the latchnor how I ransacked 

every room for food, until just on the verge of despair, in 

what seemed to me to be 
a servants bedroom, I found a 
rat- gnawed crust and two tins of pineapple. The place 

had been already searched and emptied. In the bar I 

afterwards found some biscuits and sandwiches that had 

been over- looked. The latter I could not eat, they were 

too rotten, but the former not
 only stayed my hunger, but 
filled my pockets. I lit no lamps, fearing some Martian 

might come beating that part of London for food in the 

night. Before I went to bed I had an interval of 
restlessness, and prowle
d from window to window, 
peering out for some sign of th
ese monsters. I slept little. 
As I lay in bed I found myself think- ing consecutivelya thing I do not remember to have done since my last 
The War of the Worlds  
239 of 293 argument with the curate. During all the intervening time 
my mental condition had been a hurrying succession of 

vague emotional states or a sort of stupid receptivity. But 

in the night my brain, reinforced, I suppose, by the food I 

had eaten, grew clear again, and I thought. Three things struggled for 
possession of my mind: the 
killing of the curate, the wh
ereabouts of the Martians, and 
the possible fate of my wife
. The former gave me no 
sensation of horror or remorse to recall; I saw it simply as 

a thing done, a memory infini
tely disagreeable but quite 
without the quality of remorse. I saw myself then as I see 

myself now, driven step by st
ep towards that hasty blow, 
the creature of a sequence of accidents leading inevitably 

to that. I felt no condemnation; yet the memory, static, 

unprogressive, haunted me. In 
the silence of the night, 
with that sense of the near- ness of God that sometimes 

comes into the stillness and the darkness, I stood my trial, 

my only trial, for that moment of wrath and fear. I 

retraced every step of our conversation from the moment 

when I had found him crouching beside me, heedless of 

my thirst, and pointing to 
the fire and smoke that 
streamed up from the ruins of Weybridge. We had been 
incapable of co-operationgr
im chance had taken no 
heed of that. Had I foreseen, I should have left him at 
The War of the Worlds  
240 of 293 Halliford. But I did not foresee; and crime is to foresee 
and do. And I set this down as 
I have set all this story 
down, as it was. There were no witnessesall these 

things I might have concealed. But I set it down, and the 

reader must form his judgment as he will. 
And when, by an effort, I had 
set aside that picture of a 
prostrate body, I faced the pr
oblem of the Martians and 
the fate of my wife. For the 
former I had no data; I could 
imagine a hundred things, and so, unhappily, I could for 

the latter. And suddenly that night became terrible. I 
found myself sitting up in bed, staring at the dark. I found 

my- self praying that the H
eat-Ray might have suddenly 
and painlessly struck her out of being. Since the night of 

my return from Leatherhead I had not prayed. I had 

uttered prayers, fetish prayers, had prayed as heathens 

mutter charms when I was in extremity; but now I prayed 

indeed, plead- ing steadfastly and sanely, face to face with 
the darkness of God. Strange ni
ght! Strangest in this, that 
so soon as dawn had come, I, who had talked with God, 

crept out of the house like a 
rat leaving its hiding place
a creature scarcely larger, an inferior animal, a thing that 

for any passing whim of our 
masters might be hunted and 
killed. Perhaps they also pr
ayed confidently to God. 
Surely, if we have learned 
nothing else, this war has 
The War of the Worlds  
241 of 293 taught us pitypity for those witless souls that suffer our 
dominion. 
The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky 
glowed pink, and was fretted with little golden clouds. In 

the road that runs from the top of Putney Hill to 

Wimbledon was a number of poor vestiges of the panic 

torrent that must have poured Londonward on the Sunday 

night after the fighting bega
n. There was a little two-
wheeled cart inscribed with 
the name of Thomas Lobb, 
Greengrocer, New Malden, with a smashed wheel and an 

abandoned tin trunk; there was 
a straw hat trampled into 
the now hardened mud, and at th
e top of West Hill a lot of 
blood-stained glass about the overturned water trough. 
My movements were languid, my
 plans of the vaguest. I 
had an idea of going to Leat
herhead, though I knew that 
there I had the poorest chance of finding my wife. 

Certainly, unless death had overtaken them suddenly, my 
cousins and she would have fled
 thence; but it seemed to 
me I might find or learn there whither the Surrey people 

had fled. I knew I wanted to 
find my wife, that my heart 
ached for her and the world of men, but I had no clear 

idea how the finding might be 
done. I was also sharply 
aware now of my intense lone
liness. From the corner I 
The War of the Worlds  
242 of 293 went, under cover of a thicket of trees and bushes, to the 
edge of Wimbledon Common, stretching wide and far. 
That dark expanse was lit 
in patches by yellow gorse 
and broom; there was no red weed to be seen, and as I 

prowled, hesitating, on the verge of the open, the sun rose, flooding it all with light and 
vitality. I came upon a busy 
swarm of little frogs in a swampy place among the trees. I 

stopped to look at them, drawing a lesson from their stout 

resolve to live. And presentl
y, turning suddenly, with an 
odd feeling of being watched, I beheld something 

crouching amid a clump of bushes. I stood regarding this. 

I made a step towards it, a
nd it rose up and 
became a man 
armed with a cutlass. I appr
oached him slowly. He stood 
silent and motionless, regarding me. 
As I drew nearer I perceive
d he was dressed in clothes 
as dusty and filthy as my own; he looked, indeed, as 

though he had been dragged through a culvert. Nearer, I 

distinguished the green slime 
of ditches mixing with the 
pale drab of dried clay and 
shiny, coaly patches. His black hair fell over his eyes, and hi
s face was dark and dirty and 
sunken, so that at first I did 
not recognise him. There was 
a red cut across the lowe
r part of his face. The War of the Worlds  
243 of 293 Stop! he cried, when I was 
within ten yards of him, 
and I stopped. His voice was hoarse. Where do you come 
from? he said. 
I thought, surveying him. 

I come from Mortlake, I said. I was buried near the 
pit the Martians made about th
eir cylinder. I have worked 
my way out and escaped. There is no food about here
, he said. This is my 
country. All this hill down to
 the river, and back to 
Clapham, and up to the edge of the common. There is 

only food for one. Which way are you going? 
I answered slowly. 

I dont know, I said. I have been buried in the ruins 
of a house thirteen or fourt
een days. I dont know what 
has happened. He looked at me doubtfully, 
then started, and looked 
with a changed expression. 
Ive no wish to stop about here, said I. I think I shall 
go to Leatherhead, for my wife was there. He shot out a pointing finger. 
It is you, said he; the
 man from Woking. And you 
werent killed at Weybridge? 
I recognised him at the same moment. 
You are the artilleryman who came into my garden. 
The War of the Worlds  
244 of 293 Good luck! he said. We are lucky ones! Fancy 
YOU! He put out a hand, and I took it. I crawled up a 

drain, he said. But they 
didnt kill everyone. And after 
they went away I got off towards Walton across the fields. 
But Its not sixteen days 
altogetherand your hair is 
grey. He looked over his shoulder suddenly. Only a 

rook, he said. One gets to 
know that birds have shadows 
these days. This is a bit ope
n. Let us crawl under those 
bushes and talk. Have you seen any Martians?
 I said. Since I crawled 
out Theyve gone away across 
London, he said. I guess 
theyve got a bigger camp there.
 Of a night, all over there, 
Hampstead way, the sky is alive with their lights. Its like 

a great city, and in the glare you can just see them 

moving. By daylight you can
t. But nearerI havent 
seen them (he counted on hi
s fingers) five days. Then 
I saw a couple across Hammersmith way carrying 

something big. And the night before lasthe stopped 

and spoke impressivelyit was 
just a matter of lights, 
but it was something up in the air. I believe theyve built a 

flying-machine, and are 
learn- ing to fly. I stopped, on hands and knees, for we had come to the 
bushes. The War of the Worlds  
245 of 293 Fly! Yes, he said, fly. 
I went on into a little bower, and sat down. It is all over with humanity,
 I said. If they can do 
that they will simply go round the world. 
He nodded. 
They will. But It will re
lieve things over here a 
bit. And besides He looked at me. Arent you 

satisfied it IS up with huma
nity? I am. Were down; were 
beat. I stared. Strange as it may seem, I had not arrived at 
this facta fact perfectly obvious so soon as he spoke. I 

had still held a vague hope; 
rather, I had kept a lifelong 
habit of mind. He repeated his words, Were beat. They 

carried absolute conviction. Its all over, he said. Theyve lost ONEjust ONE. 
And theyve made their footing good and crippled the 

greatest power in the world. Theyve walked over us. The 

death of that one at Weybr
idge was an accident. And 
these are only pioneers. They kept on coming. These 

green starsIve seen none these five or six days, but 

Ive no doubt theyre falling 
somewhere every night. 
Nothings to be done. Were under! Were beat! The War of the Worlds  
246 of 293 I made him no answer. I sat 
staring before me, trying 
in vain to devise some countervailing thought. 
This isnt a war, said the artilleryman. It never was a 
war, any more than theres war between man and ants. 
Suddenly I recalled the night in the observatory. 

After the tenth shot they fired no moreat least, until 
the first cylinder came. 
How do you know? said the artilleryman. I 
explained. He thought. Som
ething wrong with the gun, 
he said. But what if there is
? Theyll get it right again. 
And even if theres a delay, how can it alter the end? Its 

just men and ants. Theres the 
ants builds their cities, live 
their lives, have wars, revolutions, until the men want 

them out of the way, and th
en they go out of the way. 
Thats what we are nowjust ants. Only Yes, I said. 
Were eatable ants. 

We sat looking at each other. 

And what will they do with us? I said. 

Thats what Ive been thi
nking, he said; thats what 
Ive been thinking. After Weybridge I went south

thinking. I saw what was up. Most of the people were 
hard at it squealing and exciting themselves. But Im not 
so fond of squealing. Ive been
 in sight of death once or 
The War of the Worlds  
247 of 293 twice; Im not an ornamental 
soldier, and at the best and 
worst, death its just death. And its the man that keeps 

on thinking comes through. I saw everyone tracking away 

south. Says I, Food wont last this way, and I turned 

right back. I went for the Martians like a sparrow goes for 

man. All roundhe waved a hand to the horizon

theyre starving in heaps, bolting, treading on each 

other. He saw my face, and halted awkwardly. 

No doubt lots who had money have gone away to 
France, he said. He seemed to hesitate whether to 

apologise, met my eyes, and 
went on: Theres food all 
about here. Canned things in shops; wines, spirits, mineral 

waters; and the water mains and drains are empty. Well, I 

was telling you what I was th
inking. Heres intelligent things, I said, and it seems 
they want us for food. First, 
theyll smash us upships, machines, guns, cities, all the 

order and organisation. All that will go. If we were the 
size of ants we might pull th
rough. But were not. Its all 
too bulky to stop. Thats the first certainty. Eh? 
I assented. 

It is; Ive thought it out. Very well, thennext; at 
present were caught as were
 wanted. A Martian has only 
to go a few miles to get a 
crowd on the run. And I saw 
The War of the Worlds  
248 of 293 one, one day, out by Wandsworth, picking houses to 
pieces and routing among the wreckage. But they wont 

keep on doing that. So soon as theyve settled all our guns 

and ships, and smashed our 
railways, and done all the 
things they are doing over th
ere, they will begin catching 
us systematic, pick- ing the best and storing us in cages 

and things. Thats what they will start doing in a bit. 

Lord! They havent begun on us yet. Dont you see that? 
Not begun! I exclaimed. 

Not begun. All thats happe
ned so far is through our 
not having the sense to keep
 quietworrying them with 
guns and such foolery. And losing our heads, and rushing 

off in crowds to where there wasnt any more safety than 

where we were. They dont want
 to bother us yet. Theyre 
making their thingsmaking a
ll the things they couldnt 
bring with them, getting things ready for the rest of their 

people. Very likely thats why the cylinders have stopped 

for a bit, for fear of hitt
ing those who are here. And instead of our rush- ing a
bout blind, on the howl, or 
getting dynamite on the chan
ce of busting them up, weve 
got to fix ourselves up according to the new state of 

affairs. Thats how I figure it out. It isnt quite according 
to what a man wants for his sp
ecies, but its about what 
the facts point to. And thats the principle I acted upon. 
The War of the Worlds  
249 of 293 Cities, nations, civilisation, 
progressits all over. That 
games up. Were beat. 
But if that is so, what is there to live for? 
The artilleryman looked 
at me for a moment. 
There wont be any more blessed concerts for a 
million years or so; there wont be any Royal Academy of 

Arts, and no nice little feeds at restaurants. If its 

amusement youre after, I reckon the game is up. If 

youve got any drawing- room
 manners or a dislike to 
eating peas with a knife or dr
opping aitches, youd better 
chuck em away. They aint no further use. 
You mean 

I mean that men like me are going on livingfor the 
sake of the breed. I tell you, 
Im grim set on living. And if 
Im not mistaken, youll show
 what insides YOUVE got, 
too, before long. We arent goi
ng to be exterminated. And 
I dont mean to be caught either, and tamed and fattened 

and bred like a thundering 
ox. Ugh! Fancy those brown 
creepers! You dont mean to say 

I do. Im going on, under their feet. Ive got it 
planned; Ive thought it out. 
We men are beat. We dont 
know enough. Weve got to learn before weve got a 
The War of the Worlds  
250 of 293 chance. And weve got to 
live and keep independent 
while we learn. See! Thats what has to be done. I stared, astonished, and stirred profoundly by the mans resolution. 
Great God!, cried I. But you are a man indeed! And 
suddenly I gripped his hand. Eh! he said, with his ey
es shining. Ive thought it 
out, eh? 
Go on, I said. 
Well, those who mean to es
cape their catching must 
get ready. Im getting ready. Mi
nd you, it isnt all of us 
that are made for wild beasts
; and thats what its got to 
be. Thats why I watched you. I had my doubts. Youre 

slender. I didnt know that 
it was you, you see, or just 
how youd been buried. All thes
ethe sort of people that 
lived in these houses, and all those damn little clerks that 

used to live down that waytheyd be no good. They 

havent any spirit in themno proud dreams and no 

proud lusts; and a man who 
hasnt one or the other
Lord! What is he but funk and precautions? They just 

used to skedaddle off to workIve seen hundreds of 

em, bit of breakfast in hand, running wild and shining to 
catch their little season-ticket train, for fear theyd get 
dismissed if they didnt; work
ing at businesses they were 
The War of the Worlds  
251 of 293 afraid to take the trouble 
to under- stand; skedaddling 
back for fear they wouldnt be in time for dinner; keeping 

indoors after dinner for fear of the back streets, and 

sleeping with the wives they married, not be- cause they 

wanted them, but because they
 had a bit of money that 
would make for safety in their one little miserable 

skedaddle through the world. Lives insured and a bit 
invested for fear of accidents. And on Sundaysfear of 

the hereafter. As if hell was built for rabbits! Well, the 

Martians will just be a godsend to these. Nice roomy 

cages, fattening food, careful breeding, no worry. After a 

week or so chasing about th
e fields and lands on empty 
stomachs, theyll come and be caught cheerful. Theyll be 

quite glad after a bit. Th
eyll wonder what people did 
before there were Martians to take care of them. And the 

bar loafers, and mashers, 
and singersI can imagine 
them. I can imagine them, he 
said, with a sort of sombre 
gratification. Therell be 
any amount of sentiment and 
religion loose among them. Theres hundreds of things I 

saw with my eyes that Ive 
only begun to see clearly these 
last few days. Theres lots wi
ll take things as they are
fat and stupid; and lots will be worried by a sort of feeling 
that its all wrong, and that
 they ought to be doing 
something. Now whenever things are so that a lot of 
The War of the Worlds  
252 of 293 people feel they ought to be doing some- thing, the weak, 
and those who go weak with
 a lot of complicated 
thinking, always make for a 
sort of do-nothing religion, 
very pious and superior, and submit to persecution and the 

will of the Lord. Very likely youve seen the same thing. 

Its energy in a gale of funk, 
and turned clean inside out. 
These cages will be full of psalms and hymns and piety. 

And those of a less simple so
rt will work in a bit of
what is it?eroticism. 
He paused. 
Very likely these Martians w
ill make pets of some of 
them; train them to do trickswho knows?get 

sentimental over the pet boy who grew up and had to be 

killed. And some, maybe, they
 will train to hunt us. No, I cried, thats impo
ssible! No human being 
Whats the good of going on with
 such lies? said the 
artilleryman. Theres men 
whod do it cheerful. What 
non- sense to pretend there isnt! And I succumbed to his conviction. 
If they come after me, he said; Lord, if they come 
after me! and subsided into a grim meditation. 
I sat contemplating these things. I could find nothing to bring against this mans reasoning. In the days before the 
invasion no one would have questioned my intellectual 
The War of the Worlds  
253 of 293 superiority to hisI, a profe
ssed and recognised writer on 
philosophical themes, and he, a common soldier; and yet 

he had already formulated a situation that I had scarcely 

realised. What are you doing? I said presently. What plans 
have you made? 
He hesitated. 

Well, its like this, he said. What have we to do? We 
have to invent a sort of li
fe where men can live and breed, 
and be sufficiently secure to bring the children up. Yes

wait a bit, and Ill make it clea
rer what I think ought to be 
done. The tame ones will go like all tame beasts; in a few 

generations theyll be bi
g, beautiful, rich-blooded, stupidrubbish! The risk is that we who keep wild will 

go savagede- generate into 
a sort of big, savage rat. 
You see, how I mean to liv
e is underground. Ive been 
thinking about the drains. 
Of course those who dont 
know drains think horrible 
things; but under this London 
are miles and mileshundreds of milesand a few days 

rain and London empty will leave them sweet and clean. 

The main drains are big enough and airy enough for 

anyone. Then theres cellars, vaults, stores, from which 
bolting passages may be made to the drains. And the 
railway tunnels and subways. 
Eh? You begin to see? And 
The War of the Worlds  
254 of 293 we form a bandable-bodie
d, clean-minded men. Were 
not going to pick up any rubbish
 that drifts in. Weaklings 
go out again. As you meant me to go? 

Welll parleyed, didnt I? 

We wont quarrel about that. Go on. 

Those who stop obey orde
rs. Able-bodied, clean-
minded women we want alsomothers and teachers. No 

lackadaisical ladiesno blasted rolling eyes. We cant 

have any weak or silly. Life 
is real again, and the useless 
and cumbersome and mischievous have to die. They 

ought to die. They ought to be wi
lling to die. Its a sort of 
disloyalty, after all, to live 
and taint the race. And they 
cant be happy. Moreover, dyi
ngs none so dreadful; its 
the funking makes it bad. And in all those places we shall 

gather. Our district will be
 London. And we may even be 
able to keep a watch, and r
un about in the open when the 
Martians keep away. Play cr
icket, per- haps. Thats how 
we shall save the race. Eh? Its a possible thing? But 

saving the race is nothing in itself. As I say, thats only 

being rats. Its saving our knowledge and adding to it is 

the thing. There men like you come in. Theres books, 
theres models. We must make great safe places down 
deep, and get all the books we can; not novels and poetry 
The War of the Worlds  
255 of 293 swipes, but ideas, science 
books. Thats where men like 
you come in. We must go to th
e British Museum and pick 
all those books through. Especi
ally we must keep up our 
science learn more. We must watch these Martians. 

Some of us must go as spie
s. When its all working, 
perhaps I will. Get caught, I mean. And the great thing is, 

we must leave the Martians al
one. We mustnt even steal. 
If we get in their way, we cl
ear out. We must show them 
we mean no harm. Yes, I know. But theyre intelligent 

things, and they wont hunt us down if they have all they 

want, and think were just harmless vermin. 
The artilleryman paused and laid a brown hand upon 
my arm. After all, it may not be so
 much we may have to learn 
before Just imagine this: four
 or five of their fighting 
machines suddenly starting o
ffHeat-Rays right and left, 
and not a Martian in em. Not a Martian in em, but 

menmen who have learned th
e way how. It may be in 
my time, even those men. Fancy having one of them 

lovely things, with its Heat-Ray wide and free! Fancy 

having it in control! What 
would it matter if you smashed 
to smithereens at the end of 
the run, after a bust like that? 
I reckon the Martiansll open their beautiful eyes! Cant 
you see them, man? Cant 
you see them hurrying, 
The War of the Worlds  
256 of 293 hurryingpuffing and blowing and hooting to their other 
mechanical affairs? Something out of gear in every case. 

And swish, bang, rattle, swish! 
Just as they are fumbling 
over it, SWISH comes the H
eat-Ray, and, behold! man 
has come back to his own. 
For a while the imaginative daring of the artilleryman, 
and the tone of assurance 
and courage he assumed, 
completely dominated my mi
nd. I believed unhesitatingly both in his forecast of human destiny and in the 

practicability of his astonish
ing scheme, and the reader 
who thinks me susceptible a
nd foolish must contrast his 
position, reading steadily with
 all his thoughts about his 
subject, and mine, crouching fearfully in the bushes and 

listening, distracted by apprehen
sion. We talked in this 
manner through the early morning time, and later crept 

out of the bushes, and, af
ter scanning the sky for Martians, hurried precipitately to the house on Putney Hill where he had made his lair. It was the coal cellar of the 

place, and when I saw the work he had spent a week 

uponit was a burrow scarcely 
ten yards long, which he designed to reach to the main 
drain on Putney HillI had 
my first inkling of the gulf between his dreams and his 
powers. Such a hole I could have dug in a day. But I 
believed in him sufficiently to work with him all that 
The War of the Worlds  
257 of 293 morning until past midday at his digging. We had a 
garden barrow and shot the earth we removed against the 

kitchen range. We refreshed our
selves with a tin of mock- 
turtle soup and wine from the neighbouring pantry. I 

found a curious relief from the aching strangeness of the 

world in this steady labour. As we worked, I turned his 

project over in my mind, and presently objections and 

doubts began to arise; but I wo
rked there all the morning, 
so glad was I to find myself
 with a purpose again. After 
working an hour I began to sp
eculate on the distance one 
had to go before the cloaca was reached, the chances we 

had of missing it altogether
. My immediate trouble was 
why we should dig this long 
tunnel, when it was possible 
to get into the drain at 
once down one of the manholes, 
and work back to the house. It seemed to me, too, that the 

house was inconveniently chosen, and required a needless 
length of tunnel. And just as I was beginning to face these 

things, the artilleryman 
stopped digging, and looked at me. 
Were working well, he said. He put down his spade. 
Let us knock off a bit he said. I think its time we 

reconnoitred from the roof of the house. 
The War of the Worlds  
258 of 293 I was for going on, and after a little he
sitation he resumed his spade; and then suddenly I was struck by a 

thought. I stopped, and so did he at once. Why were you walking a
bout the common, I said, 
instead of being here? 
Taking the air, he said. I 
was coming back. Its safer 
by night. But the work? 
Oh, one cant always work, 
he said, and in a flash I 
saw the man plain. He hesitated, holding his spade. We 

ought to reconnoitre now, he 
said, because if any come 
near they may hear the 
spades and drop upon us 
unawares. I was no longer disposed to 
object. We went together 
to the roof and stood on a la
dder peeping out of the roof 
door. No Martians were to be seen, and we ventured out 

on the tiles, and slipped down under shelter of the parapet. From this position a shrubbery hid the greater portion 
of Putney, but we could see the river below, a bubbly 

mass of red weed, and the low parts of Lambeth flooded 

and red. The red creeper swarmed up the trees about the 

old palace, and their branches
 stretched gaunt and dead, 
and set with shrivelled leaves
, from amid its clusters. It 
was strange how entirely dependent both these things 
The War of the Worlds  
259 of 293 were upon flowing water for 
their propagation. About us 
neither had gained a footing; laburnums, pink mays, 

snowballs, and trees of arbor- 
vitae, rose out of laurels 
and hydrangeas, green and brilliant into the sunlight. 

Beyond Kensington dense smoke was rising, and that and 

a blue haze hid the northward hills. The artilleryman began to tell
 me of the sort of people 
who still remained in London. 
One night last week, he
 said, some fools got the 
electric light in order, and there was all Regent Street and 

the Circus ablaze, crowded with painted and ragged 

drunkards, men and women, 
dancing and shouting till dawn. A man who was there told me. And as the day 

came they became aware of a fighting-machine standing 

near by the Langham and look- 
ing down at them. Heaven 
knows how long he had been there. It must have given 

some of them a nasty turn. He came down the road 

towards them, and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk 

or frightened to run away. Grotesque gleam of a time no history will ever fully 
describe! 
From that, in answer to my questions, he came round 
to his grandiose plans again. 
He grew enthusiastic. He 
talked so eloquently of th
e possibility of capturing a 
The War of the Worlds  
260 of 293 fighting- machine that I more than half believed in him 
again. But now that I wa
s beginning to understand 
something of his quality, I could divine the stress he laid 

on doing nothing precipitately. 
And I noted that now there 
was no question that he pers
onally was to capture and 
fight the great machine. 
After a time we went down to the cellar. Neither of us 
seemed disposed to resume digging, and when he 

suggested a meal, I was nothing loath. He became 

suddenly very generous, and wh
en we had eaten he went 
away and returned with some excellent cigars. We lit 

these, and his optimism glow
ed. He was inclined to 
regard my coming as a great occasion. 
Theres some champagne in the cellar, he said. 

We can dig better on th
is Thames-side burgundy, 
said I. No, said he; I am hos
t today. Champagne! Great 
God! Weve a heavy enough task before us! Let us take a 

rest and gather strength while we may. Look at these 

blistered hands! And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon 
playing cards after we had 
eaten. He taught me euchre, 
and after dividing London between us, I taking the northern side and he the sout
hern, we played for parish 
The War of the Worlds  
261 of 293 points. Grotesque and foolish 
as this will seem to the 
sober reader, it is absolutely true, and what is more 

remarkable, I found the card ga
me and several others we 
played extremely interesting. 
Strange mind of man! that, 
with our species upon the 
edge of extermination or a
ppalling degradation, with no 
clear prospect before us but the chance of a horrible 

death, we could sit following 
the chance of this painted 
pasteboard, and playing the joker with vivid delight. 
Afterwards he taught me poker,
 and I beat him at three 
tough chess games. When dark came we decided to take 

the risk, and lit a lamp. 
After an interminable string of games, we supped, and 
the artilleryman finished 
the champagne. We went on 
smoking the cigars. He was no longer the energetic 

regenerator of his species I had encountered in the 

morning. He was still optimistic
, but it was a less kinetic, 
a more thoughtful optimism. I remember he wound up 

with my health, proposed in a speech of small variety and 

considerable intermittence. I took a cigar, and went 

upstairs to look at the lights 
of which he had spoken that 
blazed so greenly along the Highgate hills. 
At first I stared uninte
lligently across the London valley. The northern hills were shrouded in darkness; the 
The War of the Worlds  
262 of 293 fires near Kensington glowed 
redly, and now 
and then an 
orange-red tongue of flame fl
ashed up and vanished in the 
deep blue night. All the rest of London was black. Then, 

nearer, I perceived a strange 
light, a pale, violet-purple fluorescent glow, quivering unde
r the night breeze. For a 
space I could not understand it, 
and then I knew that it 
must be the red weed from which this faint irradiation 

proceeded. With that realis
ation my dormant sense of 
wonder, my sense of the proportion of things, awoke 

again. I glanced from that to Mars, red and clear, glowing 

high in the west, and then gazed long and earnestly at the 

darkness of Hampstead and Highgate. 
I remained a very long tim
e upon the roof, wondering at the grotesque changes of th
e day. I recalled my mental 
states from the midnight prayer to the foolish card-

playing. I had a violent revulsion of feeling. I remember I 
flung away the cigar with a ce
rtain wasteful symbolism. 
My folly came to me with gl
aring exaggeration. I seemed 
a traitor to my wife and to my kind; I was filled with 

remorse. I resolved to leave this strange undisciplined 

dreamer of great things to 
his drink and gluttony, and to go on into London. There, it seemed to me, I had the best 
chance of learning what the 
Martians and my fellowmen 
The War of the Worlds  
263 of 293 were doing. I was still upon the roof when the late moon 
rose. The War of the Worlds  
264 of 293 CHAPTER EIGHT 
 DEAD LONDON 
After I had parted from th
e artilleryman, I went down 
the hill, and by the High Stre
et across the bridge to 
Fulham. The red weed was tumultuous at that time, and 

nearly choked the bridge ro
adway; but its fronds were 
already whitened in patches 
by the spreading disease that 
presently removed it so swiftly. At the corner of the lane that runs to Putney Bridge 
station I found a man lying. He
 was as black as a sweep 
with the black dust, alive, but
 helplessly and speechlessly 
drunk. I could get nothing from him but curses and 

furious lunges at my head. I think I should have stayed by 

him but for the brutal expression of his face. 
There was black dust along the roadway from the 
bridge onwards, and it grew
 thicker in Fulham. The 
streets were horribly quiet.
 I got foodsour, hard, and 
mouldy, but quite eatablein a bakers shop here. Some 
way towards Walham Green th
e streets became clear of 
powder, and I passed a white terrace of houses on fire; the 
The War of the Worlds  
265 of 293 noise of the burning was an 
absolute relief. Going on 
towards Brompton, the streets were quiet again. Here I came once more upon the black powder in the 
streets and upon dead bodies. 
I saw altogether about a 
dozen in the length of the Fu
lham Road. They had been 
dead many days, so that I hurried quickly past them. The 

black powder covered them over, and softened their 

outlines. One or two had been disturbed by dogs. 
Where there was no black powder, it was curiously 
like a Sunday in the City, 
with the closed shops, the 
houses locked up and the blinds drawn, the desertion, and 

the stillness. In some places plunderers had been at work, 

but rarely at other than the provision and wine shops. A 

jewellers window had been 
broken open in one place, but 
apparently the thief had been
 disturbed, and a number of 
gold chains and a watch lay 
scattered on the pavement. I 
did not trouble to touch them
. Farther on 
was a tattered 
woman in a heap on a doorst
ep; the hand that hung over 
her knee was gashed and bled down her rusty brown 

dress, and a smashed magnum of champagne formed a 

pool across the pavement. She seemed asleep, but she was 

dead. The farther I penetrated 
into London, the profounder 
grew the stillness. But it was not so much the stillness of 
The War of the Worlds  
266 of 293 death it was the stillness of 
suspense, of expectation. At 
any time the destruction that had already singed the 

northwestern borders of the metropolis, and had 

annihilated Ealing and Kilburn, might strike among these 
houses and leave them smoking ruins. It was a city 

condemned and derelict. 
In South Kensington the street
s were clear of dead and 
of black powder. It was near 
South Kensington that I first 
heard the howling. It crept 
almost imperceptibly upon my 
senses. It was a sobbing alte
rnation of two notes, Ulla, 
ulla, ulla, ulla, keeping 
on perpetually. When I passed 
streets that ran northward it grew in volume, and houses 

and buildings seemed to deaden and cut it off again. It 

came in a full tide down Exhibition Road. I stopped, 

staring towards Kensington Ga
rdens, wondering at this 
strange, remote wailing. It was as if that mighty desert of 

houses had found a voice for its fear and solitude. 
Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla, wa
iled that superhuman note 
great waves of sound sweeping down the broad, sunlit 

road- way, between the tall 
buildings on each side. I 
turned north- wards, marvelli
ng, towards the iron gates of 
Hyde Park. I had half a mind 
to break into the Natural 
History Museum and find my 
way up to the summits of 
the towers, in order to see 
across the park. But I decided 
The War of the Worlds  
267 of 293 to keep to the ground, where quick hiding was possible, 
and so went on up the Exhibition Road. All the large 

mansions on each side of the road were empty and still, 

and my footsteps echoed agai
nst the sides of the houses. 
At the top, near the park gate, I came upon a strange 

sighta bus overturned, and the skeleton of a horse 

picked clean. I puzzled over this for a time, and then went 

on to the bridge over the Serpentine. The voice grew 

stronger and stronger, though I could see nothing above 

the housetops on the north side of the park, save a haze of 

smoke to the northwest. 
Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla, cr
ied the voice, coming, as it 
seemed to me, from the distri
ct about Regents Park. The 
desolating cry worked upon my
 mind. The mood that had 
sustained me passed. The wailing took possession of me. I 

found I was intensely weary, footsore, and now again 

hungry and thirsty. It was already past noon. 
Why was I wandering alone 
in this city of the dead? W
hy was I alone when all London 
was lying in state, and in its black shroud? I felt 

intolerably lonely. My mind ran on old friends that I had 

forgotten for years. I thought of the poisons in the 
chemists shops, of the liquors 
the wine merchants stored; 
The War of the Worlds  
268 of 293 I recalled the two sodden creatu
res of despair, who so far 
as I knew, shared the city with myself. 
I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and 
here again were black powde
r and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from the gratings of the cellars of 

some of the houses. I grew very
 thirsty after the heat of 
my long walk. With infinite trouble I managed to break 

into a public-house and get food and drink. I was weary 

after eating, and went into the parlour behind the bar, and 

slept on a black horse- hair sofa I found there. I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, 
Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla. It 
was now dusk, and after I had 
routed out some biscuits and a cheese in the barthere 

was a meat safe, but it c
ontained nothing but maggotsI 
wandered on through the silent residential squares to 

Baker Street Portman Square is the only one I can 

nameand so came out at last
 upon Regents Park. And 
as I emerged from the top of Baker Street, I saw far away 

over the trees in the clearness of the sunset the hood of the 
Martian giant from which this howling proceeded. I was 

not terrified. I came upon him as if it were a matter of 

course. I watched him for some time, but he did not move. 
He appeared to be standing and yelling, for no reason that 
I could discover. The War of the Worlds  
269 of 293 I tried to formulate a plan
 of action. That perpetual 
sound of Ulla, ulla, ulla, ul
la, confused my mind. 
Perhaps I was too tired to be very fearful. Certainly I was 

more curious to know the reason of this monotonous 

crying than afraid. I turned b
ack away from the park and 
struck into Park Road, intending to skirt the park, went 

along under the shelter of the te
rraces, and got a view of 
this stationary, howling Martia
n from the direction of St. 
Johns Wood. A couple of hundred yards out of Baker 

Street I heard a yelping chorus
, and saw, first a dog with a 
piece of putrescent red meat in
 his jaws coming headlong 
towards me, and then a pack
 of starving mongrels in 
pursuit of him. He made a wide curve to avoid me, as 

though he feared I might prove a fresh competitor. As the 

yelping died away down the s
ilent road, the wailing sound of Ulla, ulla, ulla, ulla, reasserted itself. 
I came upon the wrecked handling-machine halfway to 
St. Johns Wood station. At 
first I thought a house had 
fallen across the road. It wa
s only as I clambered among 
the ruins that I saw, with a start, this mechanical Samson 

lying, with its tentacles be
nt and smashed and twisted, 
among the ruins it had made. Th
e forepart was shattered. 
It seemed as if it had driven blindly straight at the house, 
and had been over- whelmed in its overthrow. It seemed 
The War of the Worlds  
270 of 293 to me then that this might have happened by a handling-
machine escaping from the guidance of its Martian. I 

could not clamber among the ruins to see it, and the 

twilight was now so far advanced that the blood with 

which its seat was smeared, a
nd the gnawed gristle of the 
Martian that the dogs had left, were invisible to me. 
Wondering still more at all 
that I had seen, I pushed on 
towards Primrose Hill. Far away, through a gap in the 

trees, I saw a second Martian, as
 motionless as the first, 
standing in the park towards the Zoological Gardens, and 

silent. A little beyond the ruins about the smashed 

handling-machine I came upon the red weed again, and 

found the Regents Canal, a spongy mass of dark-red 

vegetation. As I crossed the bridge, th
e sound of Ulla, ulla, ulla, 
ulla, ceased. It was, as it were, cut off. The silence came 

like a thunderclap. The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and 
dim; the trees towards the park were growing black. All 

about me the red weed clambered among the ruins, 

writhing to get above me in the dimness. Night, the 

mother of fear and myst
ery, was coming upon me. But 
while that voice sounded the solitude, the desolation, had 
been endurable; by virtue of it London had still seemed 
The War of the Worlds  
271 of 293 alive, and the sense of life 
about me had upheld me. Then 
suddenly a change, the passing of somethingI knew not 

whatand then a stillness that could be felt. Nothing but 

this gaunt quiet. 
London about me gazed at me spectrally. The windows 
in the white houses were like the eye sockets of skulls. 

About me my imagination found a thousand noiseless 

enemies moving. Terror seiz
ed me, a horror of my 
temerity. In front of me the 
road became pitchy black as 
though it was tarred, and I sa
w a contorted shape lying across the pathway. I could not bring myself to go on. I 

turned down St. Johns Wood 
Road, and ran headlong from this unendurable stilln
ess towards Kilburn. I hid from the night and the silen
ce, until long after midnight, 
in a cabmens shelter in Harrow Road. But before the 

dawn my courage returned, a
nd while the stars were still 
in the sky I turned once more towards Regents Park. I 

missed my way among the streets, and presently saw 

down a long avenue, in the ha
lf-light of th
e early dawn, the curve of Primrose Hill. 
On the summit, towering up to 
the fading stars, was a third 
Martian, erect and motionless like the others. An insane resolve possesse
d me. I would die and end 
it. And I would save myself even the trouble of killing 
The War of the Worlds  
272 of 293 myself. I marched on recklessly towards this Titan, and 
then, as I drew nearer and the light grew, I saw that a 

multitude of black birds was 
circling and clustering about 
the hood. At that my heart gave a bound, and I began 

running along the road. I hurried through the red weed that choked St. 
Edmunds Terrace (I waded breast
-high across a torrent of 
water that was rushing 
down from the waterworks 
towards the Albert Road), and emerged upon the grass 

before the rising of the 
sun. Great mounds had been 
heaped about the crest of the hill, making a huge redoubt 

of itit was the final and largest place the Martians had 

madeand from behind these heaps there rose a thin 

smoke against the sky. Against the sky line an eager dog 

ran and disappeared. The thought 
that had flashed into my 
mind grew real, grew credible
. I felt no fear, only a wild, 
trembling exultation, as I ran up the hill towards the 

motionless monster. Out of the hood hung lank shreds of 

brown, at which the hungry birds pecked and tore. In another moment I had scrambled up the earthen 
ram- part and stood upon its crest, and the interior of the 

redoubt was below me. A mighty space it was, with 
gigantic machines here and 
there within it, huge mounds 
of material and strange shelte
r places. And scattered about The War of the Worlds  
273 of 293 it, some in their over- turned war-machines, some in the 
now rigid handling- machines, and a dozen of them stark 

and silent and la
id in a row, were the Martians
DEAD!slain by the putrefactive and disease bacteria 

against which their systems we
re unprepared; slain as the 
red weed was being slain; slain, after all mans devices 

had failed, by the humblest things that God, in his 

wisdom, has put upon this earth. 
For so it had come about, as indeed I and many men 
might have foreseen had not 
terror and disaster blinded 
our minds. These germs of disease have taken toll of 

humanity since the beginning of
 thingstaken toll of our 
prehuman ancestors since life 
began here. But by virtue of 
this natural selection of 
our kind we have developed 
resisting power; to no germ
s do we succumb without a 
struggle, and to many those 
that cause putrefaction in 
dead matter, for instan
ce our living frames are 
altogether immune. But there ar
e no bacteria in Mars, and 
directly these invaders arri
ved, directly they drank and 
fed, our microscopic allies began to work their overthrow. 

Already when I watched them they were irrevocably 

doomed, dying and rotting even as
 they went to and fro. It 
was inevitable. By the toll 
of a billion deaths man has 
bought his birthright of the earth, and it is his against all 
The War of the Worlds  
274 of 293 comers; it would still be his were the Martians ten times 
as mighty as they are. For neither do men live nor die in 

vain. Here and there they were scattered, nearly fifty 
altogether, in that great gulf 
they had made, overtaken by 
a death that must have seemed to them as 

incomprehensible as any deat
h could be. To me also at 
that time this death was incomprehensible. All I knew was 

that these things that had been alive and so terrible to men 

were dead. For a moment I be
lieved that the destruction 
of Sennacherib had been repeated, that God had repented, 

that the Angel of Death had slain them in the night. 
I stood staring into the pit, and my heart lightened 
gloriously, even as the rising sun struck the world to fire 

about me with his rays. The pit was still in darkness; the 

mighty engines, so great and wonderful in their power and 

complexity, so unearthly in 
their tortuous forms, rose 
weird and vague and strange out of the shadows towards 

the light. A multitude of dogs, I could hear, fought over 

the bodies that lay darkly in th
e depth of the pit, far below 
me. Across the pit on its farther lip, flat and vast and 

strange, lay the great flying-m
achine with which they had 
been experimenting upon our denser atmosphere when 
decay and death arrested them. Death had come not a day 
The War of the Worlds  
275 of 293 too soon. At the sound of a cawing overhead I looked up 
at the huge fighting-machine that would fight no more for 

ever, at the tattered red shre
ds of flesh that dripped down 
upon the overturned seats on the summit of Primrose Hill. 
I turned and looked down th
e slope of the hill to 
where, enhaloed now in bi
rds, stood those other two 
Martians that I had seen overnight, just as death had 

overtaken them. The one had died, even as it had been 

crying to its companions; perhaps it was the last to die, 

and its voice had gone on perpetually until the force of its 

machinery was exhausted. They glittered now, harmless 

tripod towers of shining metal,
 in the brightness of the 
rising sun. All about the pit, and saved 
as by a miracle from ever- 
lasting destruction, stretched the great Mother of Cities. 

Those who have only seen London veiled in her sombre 

robes of smoke can scarcely 
imagine the naked clearness 
and beauty of the silent wilderness of houses. Eastward, over the blackened ruins of the Albert 
Terrace and the splintered spire of the church, the sun 

blazed dazzling in a clear sky, and here and there some 

facet in the great wilderness 
of roofs caught the light and 
glared with a white intensity. 
The War of the Worlds  
276 of 293 Northward were Kilburn 
and Hampsted, blue and 
crowded with houses; westward the great city was 

dimmed; and southward, beyond the Martians, the green 

waves of Regents Park, the 
Langham Hotel, the dome of 
the Albert Hall, the Imperial Institute, and the giant 

mansions of the Brompton Road came out clear and little 

in the sunrise, the jagged ruins of Westminster rising 

hazily beyond. Far away and blue were the Surrey hills, 

and the towers of the Crystal Palace glittered like two 

silver rods. The dome of St. 
Pauls was dark against the 
sunrise, and injured, I saw for the first time, by a huge 

gaping cavity on its western side. And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and 
factories and churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought 
of the multitudinous hopes and efforts, the innumerable 

hosts of lives that had gone to build this human reef, and 

of the swift and ruthless dest
ruction that had hung over it 
all; when I realised that the 
shadow had been rolled back, 
and that men might still live in
 the streets, and this dear 
vast dead city of mine be once more alive and powerful, I 

felt a wave of emotion that was near akin to tears. 
The torment was over. Even that day the healing would 
begin. The survivors of the people scattered over the 
countryleaderless, lawless, 
foodless, like sheep without 
The War of the Worlds  
277 of 293 a shepherdthe thousands who had fled by sea, would 
begin to return; the pulse of
 life, growing stronger and 
stronger, would beat again in
 the empty streets and pour 
across the vacant squares. Whatever destruction was 

done, the hand of the destroye
r was stayed. All the gaunt wrecks, the blackened skeleton
s of houses that
 stared so 
dismally at the sunlit grass of
 the hill, would presently be 
echoing with the hammers of the restorers and ringing 

with the tapping of their 
trowels. At the thought I 
extended my hands towards the sky and began thanking 

God. In a year, thought Iin a year With overwhelming force came the thought of myself, 
of my wife, and the old life of hope and tender 

helpfulness that had ceased for ever. 
The War of the Worlds  
278 of 293 CHAPTER NINE 
 WRECKAGE And now comes the strangest thing in my story. Yet, 
perhaps, it is not altogether strange. I remember, clearly 

and coldly and vividly, all that I did that day until the time 
that I stood weeping and praising God upon the summit of 

Prim- rose Hill. And then I forget. 
Of the next three days I 
know nothing. I have learned 
since that, so far from my being the first discoverer of the 

Martian overthrow, several such wanderers as myself had 
already discovered this on th
e previous night. One man 
the firsthad gone to St. Martins-le-Grand, and, while I 

sheltered in the cabmens hut, 
had contrived to telegraph 
to Paris. Thence the joyful 
news had flashed all over the 
world; a thousand cities, chilled by ghastly apprehensions, 

suddenly flashed into frantic illuminations; they knew of 

it in Dublin, Edinburgh, Manc
hester, Birmingham, at the 
time when I stood upon the verge of the pit. Already men, 
weep- ing with joy, as I have heard, shouting and staying 

their work to shake hands and shout, were making up 

trains, even as near as Crewe, to descend upon London. 
The War of the Worlds  
279 of 293 The church bells that had ceased a fortnight since 
suddenly caught the news, until all England was bell-

ringing. Men on cycles, lean-faced, unkempt, scorched 

along every country lane shouting of unhoped 

deliverance, shouting to gaunt, 
staring figures of despair. 
And for the food! Across the 
Channel, across the Irish 
Sea, across the Atlantic, corn, bread, and meat were 

tearing to our relief. All the shipping in the world seemed 

going Londonward in those days. But of all this I have no 

memory. I drifteda demented
 man. I found myself in a 
house of kindly people, who 
had found me on the third 
day wandering, weeping, and raving through the streets of St. Johns Wood. They have told me since that I was 

singing some insane doggerel 
about The Last Man Left 
Alive! Hurrah! The Last Ma
n Left Alive! Troubled as 
they were with their own affairs, these people, whose 

name, much as I would like to express my gratitude to 

them, I may not even give he
re, nevertheless cumbered 
themselves with me, sheltere
d me, and protected me from 
myself. Apparently they ha
d learned something of my 
story from me during the days of my lapse. 
Very gently, when my mind was assured again, did 
they break to me what they had learned of the fate of 
Leather- head. Two days afte
r I was imprisoned it had 
The War of the Worlds  
280 of 293 been destroyed, with every s
oul in it, by a Martian. He 
had swept it out of existence, as it seemed, without any 

provocation, as a boy might crus
h an ant hill, in the mere 
wantonness of power. I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. I 
was a lonely man and a sad one
, and they bore with me. I 
remained with them four days
 after my recovery. All that 
time I felt a vague, a growing craving to look once more 

on whatever remained of the little life that seemed so 

happy and bright in my past. 
It was a mere hopeless desire 
to feast upon my misery. They dissuaded me. They did all 

they could to divert me from this morbidity. But at last I 

could resist the impulse no longer, and, promising 

faithfully to return to them, a
nd parting, as I will confess, 
from these four-day friends w
ith tears, I went out again 
into the streets that had late
ly been so dark and strange 
and empty. 
Already they were busy w
ith returning people; in 
places even there were shops
 open, and I saw a drinking 
fountain running water. I remember how mockingly br
ight the day seemed as I 
went back on my melancholy 
pilgrimage to the little 
house at Woking, how busy the streets and vivid the 
moving life about me. So many people were abroad 
The War of the Worlds  
281 of 293 everywhere, busied in a thousand 
activities, that it seemed 
incredible that any great 
proportion of the population 
could have been slain. But then I noticed how yellow 

were the skins of th
e people I met, how shaggy the hair of 
the men, how large and bright their eyes, and that every 

other man still wore his dirty 
rags. Their faces seemed all 
with one of two expressions
a leaping exultation and 
energy or a grim resolution. Save for the expression of the 

faces, London seemed a city of tramps. The vestries were 

indiscriminately distributing bread sent us by the French 

government. The ribs of the 
few horses showed dismally. 
Haggard special constables with white badges stood at the 

corners of every street. I 
saw little of the mischief 
wrought by the Martians unt
il I reached Welling- ton 
Street, and there I saw the red weed clambering over the 
buttresses of Waterloo Bridge. 
At the corner of the bri
dge, too, I saw one of the 
common contrasts of that grotesque timea sheet of 

paper flaunting against a thicket of the red weed, 
transfixed by a stick that kept it in place. It was the 

placard of the first newspape
r to resume publicationthe 
DAILY MAIL. I bought a copy fo
r a blackened shilling I 
found in my pocket. Most of it was in blank, but the 
solitary compositor who did the thing had amused himself 
The War of the Worlds  
282 of 293 by making a grotesque scheme of advertisement stereo on 
the back page. The matter he
 printed was emotional; the 
news organisation had not as yet found its way back. I 

learned nothing fresh except that already in one week the 

examination of the Martian mechanisms had yielded 

astonishing results. Among other things, the article 
assured me what I did not believe at the time, that the 

Secret of Flying, was disc
overed. At Waterloo I found 
the free trains that were taking people to their homes. The 

first rush was already over. There were few people in the 

train, and I was in no mood for casual conversation. I got 

a compartment to myself, and sat with folded arms, 

looking greyly at the sunlit de
vastation that flowed past 
the windows. And just outside the terminus the train 

jolted over temporary rails, and on either side of the 

railway the houses were blackened ruins. To Clapham 

Junction the face of London was grimy with powder of 

the Black Smoke, in spite of two days of thunderstorms 

and rain, and at Clapham 
Junction the line had been wrecked again; there were hundr
eds of out-of-work clerks 
and shopmen working side by
 side with the customary 
navvies, and we were jolted over a hasty relaying. All down the line from there 
the aspect of the country 
was gaunt and unfamiliar; Wimbledon particularly had 
The War of the Worlds  
283 of 293 suffered. Walton, by virtue of its unburned pine woods, 
seemed the least hurt of any place along the line. The 

Wandle, the Mole, every little stream, was a heaped mass 

of red weed, in appearance 
between butchers meat and 
pickled cabbage. The Surrey pine woods were too dry, 

however, for the festoons of the red climber. Beyond 

Wimbledon, within sight of th
e line, in certain nursery 
grounds, were the heaped masses of earth about the sixth 

cylinder. A number of people 
were standing about it, and 
some sappers were busy in the midst of it. Over it flaunted 

a Union Jack, flapping cheerfully in the morning breeze. 

The nursery grounds were everywhere crimson with the 

weed, a wide expanse of livid colour cut with purple 

shadows, and very painful to the eye. Ones gaze went 

with infinite relief from the scorched greys and sullen 

reds of the foreground to the 
blue-green softness of the 
eastward hills. 
The line on the London side of Woking station was 
still undergoing repair, so I de
scended at Byfleet station 
and took the road to Maybury, past the place where I and 

the artilleryman had talked to the hussars, and on by the 

spot where the Martian had appeared to me in the 
thunderstorm. Here, moved by cu
riosity, I turned aside to 
find, among a tangle of red fr
onds, the warped and broken 
The War of the Worlds  
284 of 293 dog cart with the whitened bones of the horse scattered 
and gnawed. For a time I stood regarding these 

vestiges. Then I returned through the pine wood, neck-high with 
red weed here and there, to
 find the landlord of the 
Spotted Dog had already found burial, and so came home 

past the College Arms. A man 
standing at an open cottage 
door greeted me by name as I passed. 
I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that 
faded immediately. The door 
had been forced; it was 
unfast and was opening slowly as I approached. It slammed again. The curtai
ns of my study fluttered 
out of the open window from which I and the artilleryman 

had watched the dawn. No one had closed it since. The 

smashed bushes were just as 
I had left them nearly four 
weeks ago. I stumbled into the hall, and the house felt 

empty. The stair carpet was ru
ffled and discoloured where 
I had crouched, soaked to the skin from the thunderstorm 

the night of the catastrophe
. Our muddy footsteps I saw 
still went up the stairs. I followed them to my study, and found lying on my 
writing-table still, with the 
selenite paper weight upon it, 
the sheet of work I had left on the afternoon of the 
opening of the cylinder. For a space I stood reading over 
The War of the Worlds  
285 of 293 my abandoned arguments. It 
was a paper on the probable development of Moral Ideas w
ith the development of the 
civilising process; and the la
st sentence was the opening 
of a prophecy: In about two hundred years, I had 

written, we may expect The sentence ended 

abruptly. I remembered my inability to fix my mind that 

morning, scarcely a month gone by, and how I had broken 

off to get my DAILY CHRONICLE from the newsboy. I 

remembered how I went down to the garden gate as he 

came along, and how I had listened to his odd story of 

Men from Mars. 
I came down and went into the dining room. There 
were the mutton and the bread, both far gone now in 

decay, and a beer bottle overturned, just as I and the 

artilleryman had left them
. My home was desolate. I 
perceived the folly of the faint hope I had cherished so 

long. And then a strange thing occurred. It is no use, 

said a voice. The house is de
serted. No one has been here 
these ten days. Do not stay here to torment yourself. No 

one escaped but you. I was startled. Had I spoken my thought aloud? I 
turned, and the French wi
ndow was open behind me. I 
made a step to it, and stood looking out. 
The War of the Worlds  
286 of 293 And there, amazed and afraid, even as I stood amazed 
and afraid, were my cousin 
and my wifemy wife white 
and tearless. She gave a faint cry. I came, she said. I knewknew 

She put her hand to her throatswayed. I made a step 
forward, and caught her in my arms. 
The War of the Worlds  
287 of 293 CHAPTER TEN 
 THE EPILOGUE I cannot but regret, now that 
I am concluding my story, 
how little I am able to contri
bute to the discussion of the 
many debatable questions whic
h are still uns
ettled. In one 
respect I shall certainly provoke criticism. My particular 
province is speculative philosophy. My knowledge of 

comparative physiology is confined to a book or two, but 

it seems to me that Carvers suggestions as to the reason 

of the rapid death of the Martia
ns is so probable as to be 
regarded almost as a proven conclusion. I have assumed 

that in the body of my narrative. 
At any rate, in all 
the bodies of the Ma
rtians that were 
examined after the war, no bacteria except those already 

known as terrestrial species were found. That they did not 

bury any of their dead, and 
the reckless slaughter they 
perpetrated, point also to 
an entire ignorance of the 
putrefactive process. But proba
ble as this seems, it is by 
no means a proven conclusion. 
Neither is the composition 
of the Black Smoke known, 
which the Martians used with such deadly effect, and the 
The War of the Worlds  
288 of 293 generator of the Heat-Rays re
mains a puzzle. The terrible 
disasters at the Ealing and S
outh Kensington laboratories 
have disinclined analysts fo
r further investigations upon 
the latter. Spectrum analysis
 of the black powder points 
unmistakably to the presence of an unknown element with 

a brilliant group of three line
s in the green, and it is 
possible that it combines w
ith argon to form a compound 
which acts at once with deadly effect upon some 

constituent in the blood. Bu
t such unproven speculations 
will scarcely be of interest to the general reader, to whom 

this story is addressed. N
one of the brown scum that 
drifted down the Thames after the destruction of 

Shepperton was examined at 
the time, and now none is 
forthcoming. 
The results of an anatomical examination of the 
Martians, so far as the prow
ling dogs had left such an 
examination possible, I have already given. But everyone 

is familiar with the magnificent and almost complete 

specimen in spirits at the Natural History Museum, and 

the countless drawings that have been made from it; and 

beyond that the interest of th
eir physiology and structure is purely scientific. A question of graver and uni
versal interest is the 
possibility of another attack
 from the Martians. I do not 
The War of the Worlds  
289 of 293 think that nearly enough attention is being given to this 
aspect of the matter. At present the planet Mars is in 

conjunction, but with every re
turn to opposition I, for one, 
anticipate a renewal of their 
adventure. In any case, we 
should be prepared. It seems to me that it should be 

possible to define the position of the gun from which the 

shots are discharged, to keep
 a sustained watch upon this 
part of the planet, and to antic
ipate the arrival of the next 
attack. 
In that case the cylinder
 might be destroyed with 
dynamite or artillery before it 
was sufficiently cool for the 
Martians to emerge, or they
 might be butchered by means 
of guns so soon as the screw 
opened. It seems to me that 
they have lost a vast advantage in the failure of their first 

surprise. Possibly they see it in the same light. 
Lessing has advanced excelle
nt reasons for supposing 
that the Martians have actua
lly succeeded in effecting a 
landing on the planet Venus
. Seven months ago now, 
Venus and Mars were in alignment with the sun; that is to 

say, Mars was in opposition from the point of view of an 

observer on Venus. Subsequently a peculiar luminous and 

sinuous mark- ing appeared on the unillumined half of the 
inner planet, and almost simultaneously a faint dark mark 
of a similar sinuous character was detected upon a 
The War of the Worlds  
290 of 293 photograph of the Martian di
sk. One needs to see the 
drawings of these appearances in order to appreciate fully 

their remarkable resemblance in character. 
At any rate, whether we expect another invasion or not, our views of the human future
 must be greatly modified 
by these events. We have le
arned now that we cannot 
regard this planet as being fenced in and a secure abiding 

place for Man; we can never anticipate the unseen good or 

evil that may come upon us suddenly out of space. It may 

be that in the larger design 
of the universe this invasion 
from Mars is not without its ultimate benefit for men; it 

has robbed us of that serene confidence in the future 

which is the most fruitful source of decadence, the gifts to 

human science it has brought 
are enormous, and it has 
done much to promote the c
onception of the commonweal 
of mankind. It may be that ac
ross the immensity of space 
the Martians have watched the fate of these pioneers of 

theirs and learned their le
sson, and that on the planet 
Venus they have found a securer settlement. Be that as it 

may, for many years yet there will certainly be no 

relaxation of the eager scruti
ny of the Martian disk, and 
those fiery darts of the sky, 
the shooting stars, will bring 
with them as they fall an unavoidable apprehension to all 
the sons of men. 
The War of the Worlds  
291 of 293 The broadening of mens vi
ews that has resulted can 
scarcely be exaggerated. Before the cylinder fell there 

was a general persuasion that through all the deep of 
space no life existed beyond the petty surface of our 

minute sphere. Now we see further. If the Martians can 

reach Venus, there is no reas
on to suppose that the thing 
is impossible for men, and when the slow cooling of the 

sun makes this earth uninhabitabl
e, as at last it must do, it 
may be that the thread of life that has begun here will 

have streamed out and caught ou
r sister planet within its 
toils. Dim and wonderful is the vi
sion I have conjured up in 
my mind of life spread
ing slowly from this little seed bed 
of the solar system throughout 
the inanimate vastness of 
sidereal space. But that is 
a remote dream. It may be, on 
the other hand, that the destruc
tion of the Martians is only 
a reprieve. To them, and not to us, perhaps, is the future 

ordained. I must confess the stress and danger of the time have 
left an abiding sense of doubt and insecurity in my mind. I 
sit in my study writing by la
mplight, and suddenly I see 
again the healing valley below set with writhing flames, 
and feel the house behind and about me empty and 
desolate. I go out into the By
fleet Road, and vehicles pass 
The War of the Worlds  
292 of 293 me, a butcher boy in a cart,
 a cabful of visitors, a 
workman on a bicycle, children going to school, and 

suddenly they become vague and unreal, and I hurry again 

with the artilleryman through 
the hot, brooding silence. 
Of a night I see the black powder darkening the silent 

streets, and the contorted bodi
es shrouded in that layer; 
they rise upon me tattered 
and dog-bitten. They gibber 
and grow fiercer, paler, ug
lier, mad distortions of 
humanity at last, and I wake
, cold and wretched, in the 
darkness of the night. I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet 
Street and the Strand, and it comes across my mind that 

they are but the ghosts of the past, haunting the streets 

that I have seen silent a
nd wretched, going to and fro, 
phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of life in a 

galvanised body. And strange, too, it is to stand on 

Primrose Hill, as I did but a day before writing this last 

chapter, to see the great pr
ovince of houses, dim and blue 
through the haze of the smoke and mist, vanishing at last 

into the vague lower sky, to see the people walking to and 

fro among the flower beds on the hill, to see the sight-

seers about the Martian machine 
that stands there still, to 
hear the tumult of playing children, and to recall the time 
The War of the Worlds  
293 of 293 when I saw it all bright and clear-cut, hard and silent, 
under the dawn of that last great day. And strangest of all is it to
 hold my wifes hand again, 
and to think that I have c
ounted her, and that she has 
counted me, among the dead.  
